--- Page 1 ---
Dictionary
of Gnosis
gw Western
Esotericism
VOLUME TA
EDIT EDS Bw
Wouter J. Hanegraaff
IN COLLABORATION WITH
Antoine Faire
Roelof van den Broek
Jean-Pierre Brach

--- Page 2 ---
Wouter J. HandfA oo |
professor of Hist7m Hermetic
Philosophy and sn urrents
_ at the University of Amsterdam.
Antoine Faivre,
emeritus professor of History of
Esoteric and Mystical Currents in
Modern and Contemporary Europe
at the Ecole Pratique des Hautes
Etudes, Sciences religieuses
(Sorbonne), Paris.
' Roelof van den Broek,
emeritus professor of History of
’ Christianity at the University
of Utrecht.
Jean-Pierre Brach,
professor of History of Esoteric
Currents in Modern and
Contemporary Europe at the
Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes,
Sciences religieuses (Sorbonne),
i
Paris.
|
|
Copperplate front cover:
Jacob Bohme, Alle theosophische wercken
Amsterdam 1682, oom
Reproducedwth sion of |
Bibliotheca Philbileptiil Hermetic, ; |
Amsterdam. es > =

--- Page 3 ---
Ree Peeiadercon University Librar Thar es
5 2197 01212354 4

--- Page 4 ---
7 _ -—_ ww
é ' eae
oa
; Se -- Al
- en Ae
— = , .
| i = i.
; c .
: :a is, , 7 = . a . ;
, | > a ~<* ~ : ae ne ee ;
a7 = - > . - : 2s — -~ : = ; =) ae ‘_ =
7 ‘ ¢ _ : ie 7 ¢ — ;
: i * 7 - : = a) | : it :
a 7 ieiF en - veut— - , tr
-
. . - ' ; ~ -
: : “ 7 _ : et

--- Page 5 ---
Dictionary
of Gnosis
ewe Western
Esotericism

--- Page 6 ---
Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2022 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation
https://archive.org/details/dictionaryofgnosO000unse

--- Page 7 ---
Dictionary
of Gnosis
«x Western
Esotericism
EDsEe Dab aye
Wouter J]. Hanegraaff
TENG OR EAC BIO RC Aw EO y Nese o lielasEel
Antoine Faire
Roelof van den Broek
Jean-Pierre Brach
VEOUUS Mar Ss Tal
|e Ral hadhepabe
LEIDEN = BOSTON

--- Page 8 ---
Published under the auspices of
the Chair of History of Hermetic Philosophy and
Related Currents at the University of Amsterdam.
For all information, including Bachelor and Master program:
www.amsterdamhermetica.com
x
Nad
x
Copperplate front cover: Jacob Bohme, Alle theosophische wercken. Amsterdam 1682
reproduced with kind permission of Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica, Amsterdam
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication data
Dictionary of gnosis and western esotericism/edited by Wouter J. Hanegraaff; in collaboration with
Antoine Faivre, Roelof van den Broek, Jean-Pierre Brach.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 90-04-14371-8 (v. 1: alk. paper)—ISBN 90-04-14372-6 (v. 2: alk. paper)—
ISBN 90-04-14187-1 (set: alk. paper) 1. Gnosticism—Dictionaries. 2. Occultism—Dictionaries.
I. Hanegraaff, Wouter J. II. Faivre, Antoine, 193 4- III. Broek, R. van den. IV. Brach, Jean-Pierre.
V. Title.
B638.D53 2005
135'.4'03—dc22
2004065465
ISBN 90 04 14371 8 (Volume r)
ISBN 90 04 14372 6 (Volume 2)
ISBN 90 04 14187 1 (set)
© Copyright 2005 by Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Koninklijke Brill NV incorporates the imprints Brill Academic Publishers, Martinus Nijhoff
Publishers and VSP.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, translated stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior written
permission from the publisher.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal
use is granted by Koninklijke Brill Nv provided that
the appropriate fees are paid directly to The Copyright
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Suite 910,
Danvers, MA 01923, USA.
Fees are subject to change.
PRINTED IN THE NETHERLANDS
MULOUN LIBRARY
ANDEDCON LINIVEDeITN
ANUGROUN UNIVERSITY
ANDERSON, IN 46012-3495

--- Page 9 ---
6 CONTENTS
ANU COUAC ROTA Pes Caer cee Seb tee cates a ree Oe rs so EER Ss UE Raat a vil
I>
5. Acknowledgments ....... gos free Ni Tae tents, cen etnies Wins Lap obi Syne Shai XV
é
ListO Lc onal utes ooek Getter inter cae ee Ralg ete. Paee® xvii
isi im Entries ais Sina dh Gees|A ee serial ieee ee oes4
Dichonary onGaosis and Western Esotenicisinke 4 dean wientiterates eet 587
Indéxmoltcroups dnd Urganizationsinnn.../hienains jh dee Meets Senet 1187
Incexiof Persons: vas....82953 Rutten ticks, hae... sae Leanteaensec REE 1193

--- Page 10 ---
_a upeeagie ; votrdicl .ym.
7 ‘+ o- - neosasieaCADSe tees
ae 7 rine te tes!
ini? ¢ * leg dep 1 Sa
, 7 mado 3 . te ‘ <osoreacatlh bappryenttiie hel. |
<a — =7
‘ * =
— ~~ . : > <a wa?
tear = 7 2
® .
a b>
"a 7 enw 6, ¥ G0 of q a”
Se ots. pgs* ay, Fs eS « 2 @ _ eg 4 ~~
Sead Pe) _Bioaese Acme 65e@ — oa se eeSpeen.

--- Page 11 ---
587 “T AM” ACTIVITY
“IT AM” Activity ing of the “I AM” teachings is said to allow many
more people to make their Ascension than in times
The “I AM” movement was launched by an past, and these teachings will remain authoritative
American couple, Guy Warren Ballard (1878- for the next 10.000 years. The Ballards were cho-
1939) and Edna Anne Wheeler Ballard (1886- sen as the only “Accredited Messengers”, until the
1971). They had both shown a long-time interest time when Jesus and other Masters will visibly
toward occult literature. Guy Ballard had become manifest themselves. The Ballards, too, became
a medium himself even before his marriage in 1916 great Cosmic Beings after their own Ascension,
and apparently ‘practiced spiritualism in Chicago once they left their bodies; and already during their
for anumber of years’ (Braden). According to some lifetime they were presented as reincarnations of
sources, the Ballards were familiar not only with such famous figures as George Washington (Guy)
Theosophical literature, but also with Christian and Joan of Arc (Edna).
Science, Unity, the Rosicrucian Order A.M.O.R.C. The Ballards apparently organized their first
[> Rosicrucianism III] and some other teachings. classes as early as 1930, the messages began to be
While their message reflected the likely influence of released in 1932, and the Saint Germain Founda-
some of those teachings, they worked them into a tion (the corporate expression of the movement)
unique synthesis, which in its turn would influence was created the same year; but the real launching of
the beliefs and practices of younger movements. the movement took place in 1934, when the book
Guy Ballard claimed to have met a representative Unveiled Mysteries was published. The Ballards
of the Great White Lodge, the Ascended Master > rapidly awakened a strong interest, and as early as
Saint Germain, in 1930, on the slopes of Mount 1935 they were teaching classes in auditoriums
Shasta in Northern California. Ballard reported his seating six thousand people. But they met with
experiences in his first book, Unveiled Mysteries, opposition as well, and in 1939 this led to the
written under the pen name of Godfré Ray King. adoption of a system of closed classes instead of
He presented this meeting as the beginning of a public meetings. After World War II, the movement
number of extraordinary experiences inside and began to spread beyond America; except for a
outside of Ballard’s physical body, allowing him small group already established in Glasgow, it first
to gain knowledge of past incarnations and learn to set foot on the European continent in Switzerland
master “Projected Consciousness”. It was ex- in 1946, and from there spread to other places.
plained to Ballard that a group of Highly Evolved The members of “I AM” do not only study the
Beings ‘work ceaselessly helping the humanity of sacred books of the movement and the numerous
our earth to become Perfected men and women, dictations from the Masters received by the Bal-
and enable them to manifest in their outer lives the lards. They also have characteristic practices like
same great Perfection and Dominion as did Jesus the repetition of “affirmations” and “decrees”.
Christ’. Humanity had ‘manifested Perfection in Affirmations are ‘sentences that affirm the individ-
every way’ in ages past, but subsequently ‘man ual’s attunement to God and the blessing due to the
became sense-conscious, instead of God-con- person as a result of that attunement’ (Melton).
scious’. Now is the time of entering a New Dispen- Decrees have been described as a ‘counterpart of
sation, which will allow more rapid progress. prayer — but its spirit is not that of prayer in its
America will be the heart center of the approaching Christian sense. It is not supplication; it is demand —
“Golden Age”. The movement has a decidedly or command’ (Braden). According to Melton, the
patriotic orientation, and the special place given to practice of decreeing can be traced at least in part
America is reflected by the presence of the Ameri- to some practices of + New Thought. There are
can flag in “I AM” places of worship even outside decrees for all kinds of occasions; they could. be
of the United States. seen as involving the members in a kind of spiritual
“1 AM” is God’s Presence within each human army in the cosmic fight against the black forces.
being — that component of the human being which Decreeing is supposed to have power to influence
was created in the likeness of God. Jesus came upon secular developments as well: for instance, it was
this earth in order to show the way, and his mira- claimed that the Munich peace agreements in Sep-
cles were nothing more than God’s law put into tember 1938 had been a result of the collective
action. Through the power of the “I AM” inside efforts of “I AM” students, and that the latter were
man, humanity is able to find the way. “Ascension” able through their spiritual activity to protect
is the goal of every human incarnation. The spread- America from wart.

--- Page 12 ---
“T AM” ACTIVITY 588
Beside Saint Germain and Jesus, there are dozens mythology of the alternative religious milieu. This
of other Masters known to “I AM” members, such means that, even if the movement would continue
as Lord Maitreya, Hercules, Archangel Michael, to decrease, its doctrinal influence would still sur-
Arcturus, Astrea, Quan Yin, Helios, and Diana. vive and spread.
These names reflect the eclecticism typical of “I
AM”. The role attributed to the Masters is remi- The literature of “I AM”, such as Unveiled Mysteries,
The Magic Presence and The “I AM” Discourses, is
niscent of modern Theosophy [> Theosophical
published by Saint Germain Press (Chicago).
Society](the names of some of the Theosophical
Masters also appear in “I AM”) as well as of the Lit.: Joel Bjorling, Channeling: A Bibliographic Explo-
books written by Baird T. Spalding (1872-1953), ration, New York & London: Garland, 1992, 99-141
who had published the first volume of his Life and @ Charles Samuel Braden, These Also Believe: A Study
Teachings of the Masters of the Far East in 1924. of Modern American Cults and Minority Religious
Masters Morya and Kuthumi, of Theosophical Movements, New York: MacMillan, 1950, 257-307 @
Gerald B. Bryan, Psychic Dictatorship in America, Los
fame, were familiar to the Ballards, but through
Angeles: Truth Research Publications, 1940 # Robert
them, these masters made statements allegedly S. Ellwood, Religious and Spiritual Groups in Modern
confirming that “I AM” offered a much more America, Englewood Cliffs (New Jersey): Prentice Hall,
developed message than > H.P. Blavatsky’s. Thus 1973, 121-125 @ idem, “Making New Religions: The
in the 1930s, Morya and Kuthumi explained Story of the Mighty ‘I AM’”, History Today 38 (June
(according to the Ballards) that ‘Our Beloved Saint 1988), 18-31 @ J. Gordon Melton et al., New Age
Encyclopedia, Detroit, New York & London: Gale,Germain has accomplished more in three years
1990, passim # J. Gordon Melton, Encyclopedic
than We did in the many years of Our humble
Handbook of Cults in America (revised and updated
efforts’. “I AM” has been quite adequately de- edition), New York & London: Garland, 1992, 58-67
scribed as ‘a thorough [American] indigenization of @ Kenneth & Talita Paolini, 400 Years of Imaginary
the Theosophical experience’: “The Masters are Friends: A Journey Into the World of Adepts, Masters,
found not in faraway Egypt or Tibet, but also in the Ascended Masters, and their Messengers, Livingston
then romantic American West’ (Ellwood). (Montana): Paolini International, 2000.
While the “I AM” Activity was quite careful to
keep control over its teachings and maintain ortho- JEAN-FRANCOIS MAYER
doxy, refusing any mixture with other teachings or
messages from other sources, its pretentions to Iatromathematica
exclusivity and purity could not prevent some fol-
lowers from longing for more “dictations”. Other The term Iatromathematica was derived from
people eventually claimed contact with the Mas- the title of a Greek Hermetic treatise, well known
ters, and launched their own movements, such in medieval latin translations; in a broader sense it
as the Bridge to Freedom (and its several subse- refers to “astrological medicine” (i.e. the medical
quent offshoots) or the Church Universal and science which subordinates clinic observation and
Triumphant (+ Summit Lighthouse). Thus, today therapeutic praxis to the scrutiny of the stars). The
there exist a number of movements or informal cir- theory of Ilatromathematica is founded on several
cles derived from the “I AM” lineage. Traces of “I philosophical assumptions. The most obvious one
AM” influences can also be found in many con- is the so-called “material causalistic” assumption,
temporary occult publications, often revealed by which is already apparent from the opening words
an emphasis upon the “Violet Flame” or other typ- of the Iatromathematica: ‘The rays of the seven
ical “I AM” themes. In addition, Ballard’s reports stars are interwoven in the human limbs’. The stel-
on his encounters with visitors from Venus have lar rays are thought to carry the four Aristotelian
obviously exerted influence on some subsequent qualities of hot, cold, dry and moist, as well as
UFO groups [> UFO Traditions], especially those some other quintessential qualities, thereby affect-
allegedly in touch with the Commander of the fleet ing the human body, either directly or, more rarely,
of spaceships of the “Galactic Federation”, Ashtar through the air. A much more emblematic assum-
Sheran. Despite its lesser impact as an organization pion is the Platonic one according to which the uni-
compared with what it used to be earlier, the verse is a “Living Creature” (as in Plato’s Timaeus)
influence of “I AM” should not be underestimated. whose limbs move in co-ordination, so that a single
It appears that several teachings of the movement movement reflects all the others. According to this
have become incorporated into the common assumption, the stars are not to be considered the

--- Page 13 ---
589 IATROMATHEMATICA
cause of sublunar occurrences, but rather a sign of tures of this scientific-literary genre. An illuminat-
them, as well as a sign of physiopathological ing example is found in De decubitu, a treatise
processes. ascribed to Galen and going back to late Antiquity:
This branch of > astrology makes it possible to ‘If someone gets ill while the Moon is in Aries and
approach the unobservable processes that take in configuration with Mars or the Sun, the illness,
place inside the human body. A merciful God gave caused by the heat of the Sun, will start from the
humanity a key to the understanding of these phe- head: the patient’s meninges will begin to ache and
nomena, 1.e. scrutiny of the material world and, in he will suffer from persistent insomnia and fever. In
particular, of its noblest part: the heavens. In this this case, it will be useful to cool the patient’s body
way, Christian thought offered a justification to the and to draw blood out of it; otherwise he will suf-
prelogical intuition which established a corre- fer from delirium and phrenitis’. In this example
spondence between heavenly movements and phe- there is a clear concomitance of analogical factors
nomena and earthly occurrences, with particular of symbolical nature linked to the “control rela-
reference to the structure of the human body. On tion” theory (such as the connection between
the basis of this conception, postulating the exis- Aries and the head), and of causalistic factors (such
tence of a relationship between macrocosm and as the heat of the Sun). The properties of any single
microcosm, stars and heaven represent a pattern season (e.g. spring is hot and humid, summer is
for the formation of the human body: they are a hot and dry) were considered to be related to
text of which our body is somehow a translation. and caused by the stars of the zodiac. Zodiacal
In addition to the idea of the stars being either the signs were therefore thought to influence the envi-
material cause or the representation of physiologi- ronment and consequently the health, as well as
cal events, “astrological medicine” was founded on control the humours qualitatively related to them:
yet a third conception, which may seem highly elu- for instance, the blood, humid and hot, was sup-
sive from a metaphysical point of view, but which posed to “explode” (a process called “exaltation”
is indeed crucial for the topic in question. This in the language of astrology) in spring. Again,
conception, based both on hermetic works of a zodiacal signs were also thought to exert a contin-
religious nature (Poimandres and Asclepius are the uous control over the body organs and parts, in
most obvious examples) and on astrological conformity with a manifest analogical schema:
works, states the existence of a so-called “control Aries controls the head, Taurus the back, and
relation” between the stars and the earth, i.e. the so on.
dependence of earthly events on heavenly events, in As a consequence, a great number of pathologi-
the same way as in the sphere of politics the sub- cal events typical of springtime were ascribed to a
jects’ actions depend on the monarch’s. The events blood-surplus in the head and to the consequent
in question are considered to be of a sympathetic difficulty of refining it — according to the physiol-
nature, in the sense of a subordination to the ogy of the time — into a crystal-clear nerval fluid;
authority of superior entities. hence the phenomena of torpor, sopor, and
The language of astrology indeed makes exten- episodes of psychomotoric difficulty. The entire
sive use of political metaphors (such as ducatus, medico-astrological corpus lends itself to an inter-
imperium, regimen and the hermetic d.o1Kynt¢) in pretation based on the above-mentioned theory.
order to refer to a relationship of dependence Some treatises were devoted mainly to diagnosis,
which is neither material causality nor semiologic others either to therapeutics or to prognosis. As for
co-ordination; the latter assumption plays a funda- the latter, any causalistic interpretation was hardly
mental role in stating the dependence of various plausible, since the connection between the critical
entities (e.g. towns, territories, plants, animals, phase of the illness and the heavenly movements(in
body organs) on the stars. All the above-mentioned particular lunar movements) had a statistical basis
natural-philosophical conceptions result in a con- at best, and a numerological one at its worst. Diag-
fusing medley which may be defined as the “medico- nosis was a more intricate matter, as it was closely
astrological” tradition. While in the Hippocratic related to the scrutiny of the patient’s constitution,
collection the (rare) references to astronomical which was in turn to be traced mainly from the
observations concern solely the concomitant rising horoscope: the stars rising at the moment of a
of stars and pestilential winds, the early medico- child’s birth were thought to “impress” their qual-
astrological treatises (some of which were ascribed ities on the newborn’s body — hence the prevailing
to Hermes) already deal with the most typical fea- temperament, e.g. phlegmatic if cold and moist

--- Page 14 ---
IATROMATHEMATICA 59°
were the dominant qualities, melancholic if hot and Rosen (Studia Copernicana, 16), Krakow: Polska
dry were prevailing. The link between individuals Akademia Nauk, 1977 @ C. O’Boyle, Medieval Prog-
nosis and Astrology: A Working Edition ofthe Aggre-
and stars was an continuous one, and as such it did
gationes de crisi et creticis diebus with Introduction
not vanish after the child’s birth: the limbs and the
and English Summary, Cambridge: Welcome Unit for
organs were to be influenced throughout a person’s the History of Medicine, 1991 Nicolaus de Paganica,
life by a given zodiacal sign, and this was the case Compendium medicinalis astrologiae (G. dell Anna,
with any person subjected to the influence of the ed.), Galatina: Congedo, 1990 @ G. Zanier, La medi-
same sign. Even the effectiveness of therapeutical cina astrologica e la sua teoria: Marsilio Ficino e i suot
drugs was based upon the atemporal linkage critici contemporanei, Roma: Ateneo & Bizzarri, 1977.
between their botanical components, the stars and
G. ZANIER
the zodiacal constellations: the right moment for
the drug-intake was established on the basis of
scrutiny of the stars. As for surgery (especially phle- Ibn Sina, Abu ‘Ali al-Husayn ibn ‘Abd
botomy), it could be performed only under Allah > Avicenna
favourable astrological conditions, which took
into special consideration the influence of the Illuminaten
moon on the blood and the other humours.
latromathematical treatises of the Middle Ages I. SURVEY OF THE ORDER’S HISTORY
and the Renaissance were of a technical and prac- 2. THE ESOTERIC CONTEXT 3. HISTORY
tical nature, as they lacked any speculative founda- OF THE TRADITION
tion. On the whole, important medical writers
imbued with astrology as > Peter of Abano or > I. SURVEY OF THE ORDERS
Roger Bacon offer little, if any, scientific elabora- HIsToRyY
tion of astrological medicine as such. The only The foundation of the secret society of the Illu-
notable exceptions are > Ficino’s De vita libri tres minaten is related to the conflict between the
(1489) —a highly speculative neoplatonic work, the Catholic Counter-Reformation and the Enlighten-
influence of which can hardly be overestimated — ment in Bavaria. Although the suppression of the
and some treatises by > Paracelsus, whose astro- Jesuit order in 1773 had destroyed the external
logical conceptions fit in only partially with the organisation of the Society of Jesus, the advocates
above-mentioned schema. The complex meta- of Enlightenment, above all Adam von Ickstatt
physics of the hermetic movement inspired by (1706-1776), rector of Ingolstadt University,
Paracelsus (the so-called “chemical philosophy”) feared the influence of “ex-Jesuits”, who still held
overshadowed and sometimes completely dis- important offices in education. In 1773 Ickstatt
missed the astrological features of Paracelsian procured the Chair of Ecclesiastical Law and Prac-
medicine; therefore, astrological medicine has not tical Philosophy for his student Adam Weishaupt
been affected by this last bulwark of the magic- (1748-1830) in pursuance of an anti-Jesuit staffing
based idea of nature, which continued to exist even policy. Here on 1 May 1776 Weishaupt founded a
in the age of the scientific revolution. Still, there student league, which he first called the Order of
have been significant attempts to bring Newtonian the “Most Perfectibles”, later of the “Illuminaten”,
elements into physiopathology, the most important to serve as an organisation to defend the reading of
of which is Richard Mead’s, eloquently entitled De Enlightenment literature and related academic doc-
imperio Solis et Lunae in corpora humana (1704). trine. The members, who assumed cover-names,
Mead’s estimate of the attraction of human fluids were bound by oath to keep the existence of the
(blood, humours) by the sun and the moon, and its society as well as its activities totally secret.
possible pathologic effects, is a conspicuous exam- The Illuminaten outgrew its character as a
ple (not the last!) of what can be called “neo-astro- student circle with few participants, once Weis-
logical” medicine. haupt had admitted his former pupil Franz Xaver
Zwackh (1756-1843) as a member in February
The only extant edition is unfortunately highly uncrit-
1778. Zwackh, a Bavarian privy councillor, won
ical and full of errors in Greek: ‘TatpopoOnpatixe
for the first time older and influential men in ‘Epyod tod Tpiopeytotov mpoc “Aupova Aiydrtiov, in:
J.L. Ideler (ed.), Physici et medici Graeci minores, Munich, Eichstatt and Freising for the Order,
Leipzig, 1841, vol. 1, 367-396. among them Hofkammerrat Marchese di Con-
stanzo (1738-after 1800), who undertook a re-
Lit.: P. Kibre, “Astronomia or Astrologia Ypocratis”, cruiting trip to northern and western Germany in
in: Science and History: Essays in Honor of Edward 1779-1780. In Frankfurt am Main he was able to

--- Page 15 ---
591 ILLUMINATEN
win Adolph Freiherr Knigge (1752-1796) as a generations, indeed centuries, the Order could gen-
member, who was ultimately responsible for the erate a process of political and social transforma-
spread of the Order throughout the whole of Ger- tion leading to a society of rational citizens, still
many. In total, about 2000 persons are said to have patriarchal in structure, but free from all other
belonged to the Illuminaten, including members external authority. Any social structure exceeding
from elsewhere in Europe; 1510 of these have been the authority of the head of the family was
identified up to the present time, among them many regarded as dispensable in the future society of free
of the most famous names of the period such as > and enlightened men. The social ideal of the lead-
Goethe, Herder (1744-1803), or Pestalozzi (1746- ership of the Illuminaten Order thus matched con-
1827). cepts of the anarchical utopia of the 18th century.
As a result of the first internal conflicts, the First steps towards the realisation of this uto-
“Order General” Weishaupt was joined in 1779 by pia were made in the most diverse fields. As the
a collective governing council (“Areopagus”). This Order was internally focused on education, it was
leading group developed an inner system of direc- obvious that the latter would be emphasised in the
tion, which aimed at the education of a “new man” outside world. The Illuminaten thus played an
in the Order. It was expected that younger mem- impressive role in the pedagogic movement of
bers particularly would be sufficiently impressed, the Enlightenment for establishing model schools,
and that they would influence state and society on the so-called Philanthropin. The Illuminatus
the basis of the Order’s superior morality. The Joachim Heinrich Campe (1746-1818) led the
strategy of this education was a comprehensive Philanthropin in Hamburg, for a time together
observation of oneself and others within the mem- with Ernst Christian Trapp (1745-1818), another
bership. Every single member was to be minutely member of the Order. Johann Friedrich Simon
investigated in terms of character and educational (1747-1829), also an Illuminatus, was director of
qualities and made susceptible to direction. The the Philanthropin in Neuwied; the history of the
concrete means of achieving this was the obligation foundation of the Philanthropin in Schnepfenthal
to send in monthly reports (“quibuslicet”), whose near Gotha carries the stamp of the Illuminaten. At
information reached from the bottom of the Order a scholarly level, the academies were the focus of
through the hierarchy right up to the top and which Order activity, especially the Bavarian Academy of
were answered in the form of reply slips. The basis Sciences in Munich. In 1783 its vice-president as
of this structure were the “minerval churches”, well as two of three class directors were members
small reading societies of the Order, in which of the Order. The Illuminatus Carl Theodor von
younger and new members were gathered for train- Dalberg (1744-1817), the patron of the Mainz
ing at the respective location of an Illuminaten Academy in Erfurt, tried to strengthen the grip of
branch. The individual branches were subject to a the Order through a targeted policy of appoint-
regional prefecture; several prefectures formed ments. Influence on the literary discourse of the
provinces, two to three provinces an inspectorate. period was achieved by reviewing and _publish-
Prefects, provincials and inspectors wrote reports ing. In 1783 the Illuminatus Leopold Friedrich
preparing basic information for the Order leader- Goeckingk (1748-1828) was a co-founder of the
ship and made suggestions about how to influence influential Journal von und ftir Deutschland. The
individual members. The grand conception of this enlistment of Friedrich Nicolai (1733-1811), the
educational system of surveillance and direction Berlin publisher and editor of the Allgemeine
within the Order aimed at creating a “legion of Deutsche Bibliothek, had a multiplier-effect.
noble ones”, whose moral qualification would be However, the strategy of infiltrating the govern-
fundamentally higher than the condition of con- ing colleges and councils of the princes was the cen-
temporary bourgeois society. trepiece of Order policy. A textbook success was
The education of the “new man” was not an end achieved in the Rhineland Grafschaft of Wied-
in itself, but was supposed to train staff for a Neuwied. In the Electorate of Bavaria some ten
“moral regime”, which was to be secretly intro- percent of senior officials belonged to the secret
duced within existing states. The political goal of society, among them almost the entire board of
the Illuminaten was thus not open revolution, but censors. Important individual personalities should
rather the hidden infiltration of the various forms be named here, the above-mentioned Dalberg, later
of authority and institutions of the Ancien Régime the last High Chancellor of the Holy Roman
in the age of the late Enlightenment. With a philos- Empire, or Johann Philipp Graf Cobenzl (1741-
ophy of history of human perfectibility taken from 1810), the Austrian vice-chancellor, who in June
Rousseau’s triadic model, it was believed that over 1782 became a member. With the recruitment of

--- Page 16 ---
ILLUMINATEN 592
Imperial Supreme Court assessor Franz Dietrich 2. THE ESOTERIC CONTEXT
von Ditfurth (1738-1813) in 1780, the Illuminaten Until now, scholarly research has oscillated in
began the infiltration of the highest court in the its understanding of the concept “esotericism”
land at Wetzlar, whose second senate was finally between two basic models. One model is narrowly
dominated by Illuminaten A bitter dispute arose defined and formal, the other model is more ex-
over whether it was advisable to draw even ruling tensive in seeking to link the understanding of
princes into the Order at the beginning of 1783, “esotericism” with specific contents. The narrow
when Duke Karl August of Saxe-Weimar and Duke concept of esotericism — significantly more wide-
Ernst II of Saxe-Coburg were admitted. spread — means a school or group, which con-
The betrayal of the secret society by its own sciously secludes itself from mainstream society
membership was related to the so-called Bavarian- and develops a “higher knowledge”, according toa
Belgian barter project. Important protagonists of self-understanding accessible only to its members,
the Order had conspiratorially encouraged the who are progressively initiated over a period of
plan of Emperor Joseph II, to win Bavaria for Aus- time into established degrees of increasing under-
tria and to compensate the Elector Karl Theodor standing. There can be no doubt that the Order of
with territories of the Habsburg Netherlands. The the Illuminaten is an esoteric society in this formal
Munich “patriotic party” opposed to the plan sense.
withdrew from the Order in December 1783; from It is quite another question, whether the Illumi-
the middle of 1784 they began with targeted naten Order belongs to the history of early modern
attacks and publications to accuse the entire order esotericism in the sense of its content, i.e. whether
of dangerous dealings against the fatherland. The its “higher knowledge” can be ascribed to the eso-
result was the electoral Illuminaten mandate of teric corpus (Antoine Faivre), as it developed from
1785 and the start of persecutory measures, espe- the reception of antiquity in the Renaissance and
cially the dismissal of Illuminaten office-holders. was especially influenced by theosophical-Rosicru-
Already in February 1785 Adam Weishaupt had cian currents in the course of the 18th century.
fled from Ingolstadt to the free imperial city of Research into the Illuminaten has traditionally
Regensburg, whence he retreated to Gotha in denied this, without however discussing this ques-
August 1786. In April 1785 the “national supe- tion in any depth. The Order of the Illuminaten
rior”, Johann Martin Graf zu Stolberg-Rofsla passes for “rationalist”, a position that Helmut
(1728-1795), officially suspended the Order’s ac- Reinalter represents as a paradigm. The contrast
tivities in Germany. between the secret league of the Gold- und Rosen-
The persecution of the Illuminaten in Bavaria kreuzer [> Rosicrucianism II] is often cited — the
and the ostentatious measures to end the Order’s Illuminaten represent the Enlightenment, the Gold-
activities suggest that the year 1785 marks its end. und Rosenkreuzer the Counter-Enlightenment, or
This is however not the case. The centre of the so- else the older thinking of “enthusiasts”. In com-
ciety shifted rather from Munich, Ingolstadt and parison, the Illuminaten Order is already a mani-
Neuwied to Weimar and Gotha, which lay in the festation of modernity.
protective realm of the two Illuminaten princes. In 1984 Manfred Agethen opposed this tradi-
Under the protection of Ernst von Gotha, it was tional interpretation with a highly fruitful counter-
above all Johann Joachim Christoph Bode (1730- argument. Agethen sees the Illuminaten Order not
1793) who took over the affairs of the Order and, as the beginning of modernity, but as a late offshoot
in its final phase, assumed the position previously of the chiliastic and utopian sectarian tradition.
held by Weishaupt. A reform of the Order system This interesting new position is open to attack,
was undertaken, while its activities and contacts since Agethen — almost involuntarily given the pre-
were concentrated in northern and western Ger- vailing state of religious studies — misunderstood
many. For the first time, several foreign branches this tradition as medieval and “theologically Chris-
were now founded in Italy, France and Russia. The tian” and went so far as to discern Catholic eccle-
Order branches in Copenhagen and Jena were still siastical patterns in the Order. In a long review
functioning until the beginning of 1788; in general, essay of 1988 Ernst-Otto Fehn vehemently rejected
however, the delivery of prefecture reports and pro- this — interestingly enough no longer by referring to
tocols breaks off around the end of 1787. At the the purely “rationalist” character of the secret
turn of the year 1787-1788 the secret society of the society, but with the demand that the Illuminaten
Illuminaten expired, without any formal decree of be examined in the context of masonic [> Free-
dissolution being documented. masonry] and Rosicrucian utopias. The Order was

--- Page 17 ---
593 ILLUMINATEN
thereby located, even in terms of its content, in the “fire-worship” of Zarathustra. The worldly strug-
history of early modern esotericism — without the gle of the Illuminaten was related to the dualistic
concept of “esotericism” actually being mentioned. struggle between good and evil as cosmic princi-
Historical research of a scholarly nature into eso- ples. In June 1778, Weishaupt first dated an Order
tericism did not yet exist during the 1980s (in letter from “Eleusis” rather than “Ingolstadt”;
German-speaking countries). simultaneously he began to use an ancient Persian
By 1990 the scholarly controversy could only be calendar for dates. In this early phase, when
resolved by asking different questions, and inter- Weishaupt was solely in charge, the secret society
preting sources anew and more precisely. This of the Illuminaten was conceived as a mystery
course was pursued in a historical and philosophi- league on the basis of the Enlightenments’s under-
cal manner. It was evident that the relevant state- standing of the history and criticism of religion.
ments and observations required exact dates, that However, the actual performance of initiations
the chronology of the Order was of paramount and an internally consistent and structured grade-
importance, and that distinctions had to be made system remained a piecemeal affair during the first
between the various groups and individuals in the four years of the Order’s existence. This was still
overall organisation. It is also important to under- the case, when Freiherr Knigge was won to the
stand Illuminaten viewpoints in the context of the order in the summer of 1780. Knigge soon noticed
development of Freemasonry and esotericism in that the grade-system existed more in Weishaupt’s
the late Enlightenment. mind than in detailed practice. His offer to collab-
From the outset, the I/luminaten Order evidently orate in shaping it was gratefully accepted by
regarded itself as a competitor in an esoteric empo- Weishaupt, because he knew that Knigge — unlike
rium. When Adam Weishaupt conceived of creat- himself — was an experienced Freemason familiar
ing an anti-Jesuit student circle at the University of with the masonic systems of the time, especially the
Ingolstadt, he was working under pressure since a higher grades of the Rite of Strict Observance. At
rumour was circulating that a representative of the the same time, Knigge was disappointed by
Gold- und Rosenkreuzer was already recruiting masonic mysteries and was delighted to have the
among the students. In an age of secret societies, a opportunity of constructing an esoteric society
new league required a form and content, capable of according to his own notions. By 1781 the first
attracting and keeping new recruits. Between 1777 mandatory form of the grade-structure (Rezefs
and 1779, Weishaupt developed the foundations of unter den Areopagiten) arose under Knigge’s man-
a grade-system, initiatory rites, and a language agement. In this process, the Order of the Illu-
using geographical and historical terminology, minaten developed from Weishaupt’s loose-knit
which drew abundantly on esoteric traditions mystery society into a high-grade masonic system.
while adapted to the goals of his Order. At the Wilhelmsbad Convent of the Strict Obser-
For this purpose, two texts on the history of reli- vance in summer 1782 Knigge recruited disaffected
gion by the Gottingen professor of philosophy Freemasons, who knew as little what to make of
Christoph Meiners (1747-1810) were fundamen- the old Templar legends [-» Neo-Templar Tradi-
tal, namely Ueber die Mysterien der Alten, beson- tions] as of the newly created Martinist system [>
ders tiber die Eleusinischen Geheimnisse (1776) Martinism: First Period] of the ~ Chevaliers Bien-
and De Zoroastris vita, institutis, doctrina et libris faisants de la Cité Sainte. Plans now followed for
Commentatio prior (1778). Meiners portrayed the an Illuminaten version of the three basic grades of
ancient mysteries as a double initiation of believers. craft masonry, and the system of the “Eclectic
Superstitious notions were conveyed in the “Lesser Alliance” introduced by Freiherr von Ditfurth in
Mysteries”, while in the “Greater Mysteries” the spring 1783, finally prevailed.
veil of superstition was torn away and those few In the history of literature Knigge is regarded as
deemed worthy were initiated into the truths of an Enlightenment figure, to some extent a radical
rational understanding of God. Weishaupt accord- one. That he was simultaneously a high-grade eso-
ingly drafted first texts for the Lesser and Greater tericist was already noted by Ernst-Otto Fehn in
Mysteries of the Illuminaten — “The religion of rea- 1984. In Knigge’s view, Hermetic philosophy pos-
son” as a mystery of an esoteric league —-, and this sessed a rational, scientific character. This com-
idea was the starting-point of the Illuminaten bination of a basic Enlightenment attitude with
“order-system”. The presentation of the mystery esoteric speculation and the quest for “higher
grades, above all the form of the initiations and the knowledge”, so frequent in the 18th century, was
temple, was conceived as an adaptation of the first characterised by Rolf Christian Zimmermann

--- Page 18 ---
ILLUMINATEN 594
as “enlightened Hermeticism”. However, there are Johann Friedrich Kleuker (1749-1827), a teacher
no definite boundaries between Baroque esotericism in Osnabriick, who later translated and popu-
on the one hand and the purely rational Enlighten- larised the doctrines of > Saint-Martin in Ger-
ment on the other. There are rather graduated dif- many. Weishaupt now wanted to halt this tendency
ferences and a crucial benchmark was the attitude and undertake the task of Enlightenment among
towards 17th-century theosophy [> Christian existing members of the Order. On the basis of a
Theosophy]. Knigge publicly polemicised against new publication by Christoph Meiners (Beytrag
the rival order of the Gold- und Rosenkreuzer, but zur Geschichte der Denkart der ersten Jahrhun-
regarded the original Rosicrucian manifestos as derte nach Christi Geburt, 1780/82), he composed
the basis of many reforming ideas and precursors a new text, Unterricht fur alle Mitglieder, welche
of the Enlightenment (Ueber Jesuiten, Freymaurer zu theosophischen Schwdarmereyen geneigt sind.
und deutsche Rosenkreutzer, Leipzig 1781). By Weishaupt wanted to dissuade and also to build
contrast, Christoph Meiners, who had been inter- anew. From the second half of 1782 onwards, he
ested in the esoteric garb of rational truths, and on worked on developing Knigge’s IIluminaten system
whose understanding of ancient mystery-schools of Freemasonry — now on a higher level than ini-
Weishaupt had first constructed the Illuminaten, tially — into a secret Enlightenment society.
rejected all theosophy as irrational enthusiasm. In the years 1782-1783 Weishaupt finally devel-
When the Areopagus circulated within the Order oped four grades for his new mystery-school. The
the text that Knigge had composed for the Scottish Anrede to the Directing Illuminaten became the
Knight grade, the initiation of the “Directing Illu- first grade of the Lesser Mysteries, the grade of
minatus”, there was an open dispute about the Priest; next came the grade of Regent. The Greater
character and status of esoteric ideas in the Order. Mysteries completed the whole structure, firstly the
In this grade-text Knigge had attributed to the grade of Magus or Philosophus, and as the supreme
Order’s system of observances a theosophical pro- and last revelation of the Order, the grade of
gression from the early Christian-Gnostic commu- Docetist. With this explicit reference to Docetism,
nities into a future when man could regain his the founder of the Illuminaten placed his Order in
former divine status. This notion and its mystical the tradition of Gnostic heresy [> Gnosticism].
language created a scandal, especially in the Got- The text of the supreme mystery-grade shows
tingen circle of Illuminaten, to which belonged Weishaupt to be the agent of a rigorously abstract,
Meiners as a recent recruit, Johann Benjamin enlightened form of esotericism. In 1999 Martin
Koppe (1750-1791), professor of theology, and Mulsow analysed the Docetist grade in terms of the
Johann Georg Heinrich Feder (1740-1821), pro- history of philosophy for the first time, placing it in
fessor of philosophy. When Feder complained to the tradition of Hermetic “left-wing Wolffanism”
Weishaupt about “religious play-acting”, the latter from an 18th-century vantage-point. Here, on a
intervened effectively for the first time in the con- Sensualist basis, Weishaupt developed the prospect
struction of the order-system. He instructed Zwackh of a higher knowledge after death. The centrepiece
to suspend the circulation of the grade-text of was the doctrine of metempsychosis, the notion of
the Directing Illuminatus and personally wrote the transmigration of souls [> Reincarnation] as
an Anrede an die neu aufzunehmenden IIlumina- the Pythagorean journey of the dead.
tos dirigentes, which was intended to supplant Supported by the founder, the opponents of
Knigge’s draft and restore Weishaupt’s standing theosophy won the upper hand in the course of the
with the Gottingen members. It was vitally impor- years 1783-1784. Ditfurth denounced Falcke as a
tant for the professor at the half-Jesuit Bavarian Gold- und Rosenkreuzer to the Order leadership;
state University of Ingolstadt, that the professors of he was thereupon removed as Inspector of the
the famous University of Gottingen remained in the Order provinces of Upper and Lower Saxony. Mei-
Order and accepted his intellectual leadership. ners demanded that the purging of all “magical-
At the same time it became increasingly obvious hermetic sciences” be made a priority of Order
that Knigge was by no means the only member of policy. In July 1784 Knigge was driven out of the
the Illuminaten Order to adopt a theosophical Order. When Bode travelled to the convention of
position. His solicitations among the Knights of the the Philalethes at Paris in 1787, he handed in a
Strict Observance had introduced numerous mem- memorandum claiming all secret sciences were
bers into the Order, who thought along similar lines, only snares the Jesuits had laid for the Freemasons.
including Ernst Friedrich Hektor Falcke (1751- Hermann Schiittler, in a first investigation of these
1809), a Gottingen court councillor, who was also contacts, has been able to demonstrate that, on the
a member of the Gold- und Rosenkreuzer, and eve of the French Revolution, several Paris lodge

--- Page 19 ---
S95 ILLUMINATEN
brothers shared with Bode the view that esoteric had left his Order papers, was searched on 11/12th
ideas were no longer valid. October 1786. In May 1787 a second raid was
The question concerning the esoteric character made at Schlofs Sandersdorf near Ingolstadt, the
of the Illuminaten Order can therefore be answered property of Thomas Franz Maria Freiherr von Bas-
with some discrimination. There was a strong anti- sus (1742-1815), who had likewise flown. A selec-
esoteric potential, but traditional contexts and tion of the abundant Order documentation found
continuities were still effective in the age of Enlight- in both searches was published in 1787 by the
enment. Even the presence of utopian features in electoral government (Einige Originalschriften
the educational system and goals of the Order sug- des Illuminatenordens and Nachtrag von weitern
gests that early modern contexts cannot be simply Originalschriften). The entire collection was
excluded. However, within this Order there was a brought to the Munich Geheimes Hausarchiv and
broad platform for discussion: here theosophists has been lost since the Second World War. The
encountered deists, and enthusiastic Freemasons French historian of Freemasonry, René Le Fores-
those who regarded masonic rituals as mere child’s tier, was still able to work with this material.
play. An essential part of the internal conflict was The same applies to Leopold Engel, an esoteric
rooted in the dispute concerning the relevance and writer and member of a “new” Illuminaten Order
meaning of esoteric traditions. founded in the late 19th century. The latter was a
purely theosophical society, which had no actual
3. HISTORY OF THE TRADITION link with the 18th-century original, but claimed to
Secret societies possess and pursue an identity, be following in its tradition.
which is diametrically opposed to the normal gen- The publication of Illuminaten grade texts had
eration of source material. The existence of the already begun in 1786 with Weishaupt’s decision
society itself is supposed to remain hidden, to make the purely philosophical and esoteric
together with its membership and above all its supreme mystery-grade available to the public.
plans and goals. Cover-names for persons and This tactic of distracting attention from the more
places are intended to prevent the identification of strongly political contents of other grades did not
the actors. Given such provisions, it is astonishing wholly succeed, because a year later the Ori-
how much material has survived and is available to ginalschriften contained his Anrede an die neu
scholarly research. aufzunehmenden Illuminatos dirigentes, that is the
This transmission of sources has three major text of the Priest grade from the Lesser Mysteries.
causes. Firstly, the written evidence of daily Order This was the situation until the definitive cessation
life — correspondence, reports, drafts — was by no of Order activities even outside Bavaria. Not until
means destroyed but collected in the private files of 1788 did the Illuminatus and Mainzer Hofgerichts-
leading Illuminaten to whom they were addressed. rat Johann Heinrich Faber (1722-1791) publish all
Secondly, a high percentage of the individual Order lower grade-texts up to that of “Grand Illumina-
branches were located within masonic lodges, so tus”. The conclusion of this publishing process fol-
that some material is also found in lodge archives. lowed in the context of the anti-masonic literature
Thirdly, the betrayal of the Order in the mid-1780s fostered by the French Revolution. In 1794 the
led to a wave of anti- and pro-Illuminaten publi- former Illuminaten prefect and Giefen privy
cations. Adam Weishaupt himself participated councillor Ludwig Adolph Christian von Grolman
especially in this late and involuntary publicity. (1741-1809) printed the complete Lesser Myste-
Naturally, this group of sources may be used only ries as a study of conspiracy theory; in the same
with care — but it also offers authentic material. year the theosophical grade of the Directing Illumi-
In July 1785 the Bavarian priest and Illuminatus natus in Knigge’s version appeared. At that time
Johann Jakob Lanz (1735-1785) was struck by only the first grade of the Greater Mysteries,
lightning. In his literary estate were Order docu- Philosophus, remained unprinted. W. Daniel Wil-
ments and the first membership list to fall into the son edited it in 1994 coincidentally with Hermann
hands of the Bavarian government. The hearings Schittler.
of the Illuminatus and Munich court councillor The most important archival collection available
Johann Franz von Mandl a year later finally un- today for research is the literary estate of Johann
leashed the persecutions of the years 1786 and Joachim Christoph Bode. Bode’s papers had
1787, initially directed against two members of the remained completely untouched by official investi-
Areopagus. Franz Xaver Zwackh had just man- gations thanks to the protection of the Duke of
aged to reach the safety of the free imperial city of Saxe-Weimar. Bode had died in December 1793
Augsburg, before his house in Landshut, where he and his literary executor, the Illuminatus and

--- Page 20 ---
ILLUMINATEN 596
Weimar minister Christian Gottlieb von Voigt Grand National Mother-Lodge “Zu den drei
(1743-1819), transferred the voluminous masonic- Weltkugeln”.
Illuminaten documents in January 1794 to Duke
Adam Weishaupt, Ueber Materialismus und Idealis-
Ernst II of Saxe-Gotha, who had bought the papers
mus: Ein philosophisches Fragment, Nurnberg, 1786
for 1500 Thalers while Bode was still alive. [Printed version of the Docetist grade, 29-104] ¢@
Duke Ernst had Bode’s papers sealed and deter- Einige Originalschriften des Illuminatenordens, welche
mined in his will that his own masonic estate bey dem gewesenen Regierungsrath Zwack ... vor-
should be sent after his death to the archive of the gefunden worden, Munich: Anton Franz, 1787 ¢
Grand National Lodge in Stockholm, where the Nachtrag von weitern Originalschriften, welche die
Illuminatensekte ... betreffen, Munich: Joseph Lin-duke knew the material would be secure against
dauer, 1787 @ Johann Heinrich Faber, Der Gchte Illu-
publication. This transfer was effected after his
minat oder die wahren, unverbesserten Rituale der
decease in April 1804 through confidential Illumi- Illuminaten, Edessa [Frankfurt am Main]: Johann Chr.
naten offices. His legal executor was the Altenburg Hermann, 1788 @ Adam Weishaupt, “Unterricht fiir
chancellor and Illuminatus Johann Georg Geifler alle Mitglieder, welche zu theosophischen Schwar-
(1760-after 1831). Three large boxes went to mereyen geneigt sind”, in: Adam Weishaupt, Das
Stockholm, one of them containing Bode’s papers. verbesserte System der Illuminaten, seine Einrichtun-
gen und Grade, new edition, Frankfurt, Leipzig, 1788,
Thus arose the term “Swedish Box” for the most
360-416 Ludwig Adolph Christian von Grolman,
significant Illuminaten archive. In 1880, following
Die neuesten Arbeiten des Spartacus und Philo in
a request from Gotha, the Swedish Box returned to dem Illuminaten-Orden, Frankfurt am Main, 1794
Germany and was incorporated in the lodge @ Illuminatus Dirigens oder Schottischer Ritter .. .,
archive. Including the papers of Duke Ernst, the Frankfurt am Main, 1794 Jan Rachold (ed.), Die
material was collected in twenty uniform volumes. Illuminaten: Quellen und Texte zur Aufklarungs-
In 1935 it was confiscated in the context of a ideologie des Illuminatenordens (1776-1785), Berlin:
Akademie-Verlag, 1984 # W. Daniel Wilson, “‘Der
nationwide suppression of Freemasonry by the
politische Jacobinismus, wie er leibt und lebt?’ Der Illu-
National Socialist regime in Germany. After an minatenorden und revolutionare Ideologie: Erstver6f-
“Abteilung fiir Grundlagenforschung” was estab- fentlichung aus den ‘Hoéheren Mysterien’”, Lessing
lished in 1939 in the Reich Security Main Office, Yearbook 25 (1994), 133-184 Johann Christoph
the Gotha documents were also evaluated from a Joachim Bode, Journal von einer Reise von Weimar
National Socialist ideological standpoint in the nach Frankreich im Jahr 1787 (Hermann Schiittler, ed.),
1941 habilitation thesis of Alfred RofSberg (1904- Munich: ars una, 1994 [361-414 Edition der “Hohe-
ren Mysterien”] # Adolph Freiherr Knigge, Ausge-
1943), supervised by Gunther Franz (1902-1992),
wahlte Werke in zehn Banden (Wolfgang Fenner, ed.),
professor of history at Jena, SS historian, and vol. 7: Philosophie II, Hanover: Fackeitrager, 1994.
scholarly adviser of the Berlin Forschungsstelle. As
the war progressed, the Swedish Box was stored in Lit.: Manfred Agethen, Geheimbund und Utopie:
Silesia, where it was confiscated by the Red Army Illuminaten, Freimaurer und deutsche Spataufklarung
and transferred to the Soviet Union. In the 1950s (Ancien Régime, Aufklarung und Revolution rz),
Munich: Oldenbourg, 1984 @ Richard van Dilmen,
the estate of Bode with the masonic materials
Der Geheimbund der Illuminaten (Neuzeit im Aufbau
returned from Moscow to Germany and thus 1), Stuttgart-Bad Cannstadt: frommann-holzboog,
arrived at the Zentrales Staatsarchiv of the German 1977 @ Renate Endler, “Zum Schicksal der Papiere von
Democratic Republic (This collection comprised Johann Joachim Christoph Bode”, Quatuor Coronati
volumes 1-9, 11-20 of the Swedish Box; the tenth 27 (1990), 9-35 # Leopold Engel, Geschichte des Illu-
minaten-Ordens: Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte Bayerns,volume remained in Moscow). In 1975 a start was
Berlin: Hugo Bermihler, 1906 Ernst-Otto Fehn,
made in cataloguing the archive in Merseburg, but
“Biographische Anmerkungen zur Funktion der Frei-
access to its contents was too restricted for schol- maurerei im letzten Drittel des 18. Jahrhunderts”,
arly study. Tijdschrift voor de Studie van de Verlichting 12: 3/4
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the (1984), 311-324 @ idem, “Der Illuminatenorden und
partial opening of Russian archives to interna- die Aufklarung: Kritik und Korrektur einer neuen
tional research, the tenth volume of the Swedish Interpretation”, Aufklarung-Vormdarz-Revolution 7
Box was rediscovered by the Merseburg archivist (1988), 6-30 @ Hans Grafl, Aufbruch zur Romantik:
Bayerns Beitrag zur deutschen Geistesgeschichte 176 5-
Renate Endler in the Moscow special archive. As
1785, Munich: Beck, 1968 # Ludwig Hammermayer,
a consequence of German reunification, the Free- Geschichte der bayerischen Akademie der Wis-
masonry archives were transferred in 1994 from senschaften 1759-1807, vol. 2, Munich: Beck, 1983
Merseburg to the Geheimes Staatsarchiv Preufsi- Reinhart Koselleck, Kritik und Krise: Eine Studie zur
scher Kulturbesitz Berlin. Here the estate of Bode is Pathogenese der biirgerlichen Welt, Freiburg, Munich:
available for scholarly use with permission of the Karl Alber, 1959 @ Reinhart Koselleck, “Adam

--- Page 21 ---
597 ILLUMINES D’AVIGNON
Weishaupt und die Anfange der birgerlichen Ge- bly, they met at Prince Henry’s small court of
schichtsphilosophie in Deutschland”, Tijdschrift voor Rheinsberg near Berlin, where Jacques Pernety was
de Studie van de Verlichting 4: 3/4 (1976), 317-327 a tax inspector, and which was also frequented by
René Le Forestier, Les [/luminés de Baviere et la Franc-
Le Baud de Nans. They were soon joined by three
Magonnerie allemande, Paris, 1914; repr. Milan:
Arché, 20or @ Peter Christian Ludz (ed.), Geheime more people, who later came to play a dominant
Gesellschaften (Wolfenbiitteler Studien zur Aufkla- role in the group: Louis Joseph Bernard Philibert
rung V/r), Heidelberg: Lambert Schneider, 1979 ¢ Guyton de Morveau, called Brumore (1738-1786,
Martin Mulsow, “Verniinftige Metempsychosis: Uber librarian of Prince Henry, and a colleague of
Monadenlehre, Esoterik und geheime Aufklarungsge- Jacques Pernety), Dom Antoine-Joseph Pernety
sellschaften im 18. Jahrhundert”, in: Monika Neuge-
(1716-1796), and the Polish count Thaddeus
bauer-W6lk (ed.), Aufkldrung und Esoterik, Hamburg:
Leszezyc Grabianka (1740-1807), Starost of Liva.
Meiner, 1999, 211-273 @ Monika Neugebauer-W6lk,
Reichsjustiz und Aufklarung: Das Reichskammer- They all shared an interest in > alchemy, and it is
gericht im Netzwerk der Illuminaten (Schriftenreihe likely that they first gathered to discuss some
der Gesellschaft fiir Reichskammergerichtsforschung alchemical manuscripts by > Nicolas Flamel and
14), Wetzlar, 1993 idem, Esoterische Biinde und Mardochée (a poet at the court of ~ Rudolf II of
Burgerliche Gesellschaft: Entwicklungslinien zur mo- Prague, who had been charged by the Emperor
dernen Welt im Geheimbundwesen des 18. Jahrhun-
with putting alchemical texts into rhyme), which
derts (Kleine Schriften zur Aufklarung 8), Gottingen:
were in the possession of Le Baud de Nans. Wallstein, 1995 @ idem, “Die utopische Struktur
gesellschaftlicher Zielprojektionen im Illuminaten- Alchemical experiments indeed were, and would
bund”, in: Monika Neugebauer-Wolk & Richard remain, one of the Illuminés’ major preoccupa-
Saage (eds.), Die Politisierung des Utopischen im 18. tions. A second one consisted in regular consulta-
Jahrhundert, Tubingen: Max Niemeyer, 1996, 169- tion of a mysterious oracle, referred to as “la Sainte
197 @ Jan Rachold, Die aufklarerische Vernunft im Parole” (The Sacred Word). If a member of the
Spannungsfeld zwischen rationalistisch-metaphysi-
group wished to consult this supposed source of
scher und politisch-sozialer Deutung (Daedalus 11),
supernatural wisdom, he would enter a certain Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 1999 # Helmut
Reinalter (ed.), Aufklarung und Geheimgesellschaften: room, write his question on a piece of paper, and
Freimaurer, Illuminaten und Rosenkreuzer, Bayreuth, leave; on returning to the room later, he would find
1992 @ Helmut Reinalter (ed.), Der I/luminatenorden a written response. The real author of the responses
(1776-1785/87), Frankfurt am Main u.a.: Peter Lang, has long remained a mystery, but due to the
1997 @ Adolf Rofberg, Freimaurerei und Politik im researches of Reinhard Breymayer (1984; 1995) he
Zeitalter der Franzdsischen Revolution, Berlin: Nord-
can now be identified as Johann Daniel Miller
land, 1942 @ Hans-Jiirgen Schings, Die Briider des
Marquis Posa: Schiller und der Geheimbund der IIlu- (1716-after 1786): a violin virtuoso, radical pietist,
minaten, Tibingen: Max Niemeyer, 1996 # Hermann Swedenborgian, alchemist, kabbalist, and mil-
Schiittler, Die Mitglieder des Illuminatenordens 1776- lenarian prophet who saw himself as “Elias
1787/93 (Deutsche Hochschuledition 18), Munich: ars Artista”, the “messiah of Nature” whose advent
una, 1991 # Werner Trofbach, Der Schatten der Auf- had first been predicted by > Paracelsus (Faivre
klarung: Bauern, Birger und Illuminaten in der
2002/2003). The connection between Miller and
Grafschaft Wied-Neuwied (Deutschlands achtzehntes
(what would later be known as) the Illuminés
Jahrhundert. Studien 1), Fulda: Ulenspiegel, 1991 @
W. Daniel Wilson, Geheimrate gegen Geheimbiinde: d’Avignon was made by Brumore, who shared
Ein unbekanntes Kapitel der klassisch-romantischen Miller’s Swedenborgian interests and had made his
Geschichte Weimars, Stuttgart: J.B. Metzler, 1991 @ acquaintance in Hamburg in 1784. The Illuminés
Bibliography on the Illuminaten Order on the Internet: venerated “Elias Artista” as their “hidden master”,
http://www.geheime-gesellschaften.de/Bibliographie- but never got to meet him in person and did not
Illuminatenorden.htm.
know who hid behind the pseudonym.
If Brumore was the link between the Illuminés
MONIKA NEUGEBAUER-WOLK
and their hidden sources of spiritual authority
(“Elias Artista” and La Sainte Parole), Grabianka
Illuminés d’Avignon
provided them with their financial resources and
acted as ritual leader in the consecrations that came This group of esotericists has its origins not in
to be prescribed by La Sainte Parole. As for > DomAvignon but in Berlin, probably in 1778. Its first
Pernety, by now 63 years of age, he seems to havemembers were Prince Henry of Prussia (the brother
acted as a kind of father figure for the others.of king Frederick the Great), Jacques Pernety (older
Extremely well acquainted with all kinds of eso-brother of > Dom Antoine-Joseph Pernety), and
teric literature, especially alchemical, he alsoClaude Etienne le Baud de Nans (an actor). Possi-

--- Page 22 ---
ILLUMINES D’AVIGNON 598
played the role of an expert. He consulted La Sainte Among the various people who were subse-
Parole more than anyone else: in the manuscript quently consecrated were Grabianka’s wife and his
transcript (preserved in the Musée Calvet in Avi- six-years old daughter Annette. They were in
gnon, and published by Meillassoux-Le Cerf in Poland when La Sainte Parole ordered them to be
1992) of the questions and answers posed to and consecrated, so Grabianka went there for the occa-
received from La Sainte Parole, 69 pages are sion, on May 9th 1779. But as soon as he had con-
needed for Pernety, followed by 21 for Grabianka. secrated his daughter, La Sainte Parole ordered him
Although most of these questions deal with to “sacrifice” her: Grabianka had to separate from
alchemy, all kinds of other questions regarding the her, and hand her education over to Brumore and
functioning of the group are posed by Pernety as Miss Bruchié. Initially unwilling to comply, he and
well. While modern scholars have often regarded his wife eventually brought Annette to Berlin; and on
him as the leader of the Illuminés, it is more accu- March roth, 1780, on the top of the “desert” hill,
rate to assume that he shared leadership with Gra- he handed her over to her new parents, who had
bianka and Brumore. In fact, La Sainte Parole never seen her before. In the wake of this event,
referred to Grabianka as the “King of the New Grabianka’s wife left him and the group. Although
Israel”, and to Pernety as its “Pontiff”. La Sainte Parole had ordered a separation of seven
The group’s size has often been exaggerated. years, precisely three years later (on March roth,
Although it has been claimed that hundreds of peo- 1783) it ordered Annette to be returned to her real
ple were members, for the entire period of its exis- parents, whom she had not seen in the meantime.
tence only twenty-one consecrated devotees have During the first few years of their existence, the
been identified with certainty (Meillassoux-Le Cerf Illuminés concentrated on their alchemical work.
1992, 113). This number may be expanded, how- We know that, at least according to Antoine Per-
ever, if one includes all people who in one way or nety, the aim was to cure mankind of its diseases
another associated themselves with the IIluminés rather than to make gold. However, the Great
without having been officially consecrated. We then Work did not produce the expected results. As
come to a number of circa thirty people during the early as 1780, La Sainte Parole began to utter mys-
group’s Berlin stage, circa one hundred during its terious millenarian statements about the advent of
later existence in Avignon. It is significant that ‘the new heaven and the new earth’, and by 1781 it
many of them belonged to the higher strata of soci- had become clear that the Illuminés would have to
ety: wealthy and cultivated people, many of them leave Berlin and go to a new but as yet unspecified
intellectuals. place where they should establish ‘the foundations
It seems to have been as a result of instructions of the city of his [God’s] new people’ (Meillassoux-
by La Sainte Parole that the Illuminés evolved from Le Cerf, 365-366). But it took long before the
amore or less informal group of likeminded people answers from La Sainte Parole became sufficiently
to a more formal initiatic society. Admission had to clear to act on them. For a long time, the Illuminés
take place by a ceremony, called the consecration. did not know more than that the city of the new
It should be performed on the top of a hill near Sion had to rise up in the south, at the banks of a
Berlin, referred to as “the desert”, at the rising of big river, at four days walking from Berlin.
the sun, during nine consecutive days. On the hill- The Illuminés’ early years in Berlin were fol-
top, each candidate had to prepare an altar of turf, lowed by a period during which the leading figures
called his “Altar of power”, in the centre of a circle left the city. In June 1783, Brumore, Grabianka,
of stones; incense had to be burnt on it, and he had Ronikier and Miss Bruchié moved to Poland,
to swear to consecrate himself to the service of where they continued their alchemical work. And
God, by an alliance with the Eternal One. In return, some months later, on November tro, having
he could obtain the favour of seeing his angel (e.g. obtained permission from king Frederick to quit
Assadai for Antoine Pernety, Ajadoth for La his job, Antoine Pernety left Berlin on orders of La
Richardiére) or receiving a special grace. This Sainte Parole. He ended up with his brother
alliance was called: “to make a Jehovah” (fair un Jacques, who had already left Berlin and was now
Jéhovah). It fell to Grabianka to first execute the living in Valence. In April 1784, Brumore and miss
ceremony, and thereby consecrate himself. He was Bruchié traveled from Poland to Hamburg, where
then commissioned to consecrate Pernety, Brumore they received from “Elias Artista” two bottles of
and Miss Bruchié (the consort of Brumore). These “prime matter” and the recipe for completing the
four were also the ones who most frequently con- Work; they traveled on to Strasbourg, where Bru-
sulted La Sainte Parole and were clearly the most more separated from his consort and left her with
important members of the group. her parents. He traveled on to Basel, where, on

--- Page 23 ---
S99 ILLUMINES D’AVIGNON
october 3, 1784, La Sainte Parole finally revealed group seems to have continued practicing the orig-
to him the name of the place where the group must inal ritual and alchemical practices and can be
reunite: Avignon, at that time a very special place regarded as the most direct continuation of the Illu-
because it did not formally belong to France but to minés, whereas the two other groups developed
the Roman Catholic Church. into new directions. Confusingly, however, all of
Brumore arrived in Avignon the same month, them together have frequently been referred to by
while one of the group’s members, the doctor later authors not by their new names but as the IIlu-
Frangois-Louis la Richardiére, went to Valence to minés d’ Avignon.
inform Pernety. The latter decided to remain in If one trusts the sources, which are not always
Valence for the time being, but began to visit Avi- reliable, one is led to conclude that Grabianka in
gnon frequently. In March 1785 he did move to fact developed a completely new ritual. It suppos-
Avignon, where he consecrated La Richardiére as edly took place in a temple in the form of a cross,
well as Antoine Bouge, and kindled a fire for the with four altars in its four arms: one for God the
new alchemical Work, which was now being pur- Father, one for Jesus Christ, one for the Holy Spirit,
sued under La Richardiére’s supervision. Grabi- and one for the Virgin Mary, Mother of God. His
anka arrived in Avignon in 1785 as well, bringing “New Israel” was guided by a council of seven
with him the alchemical materials that had been members, including the functions of Pontiff (Alier),
made by Ronikier and Brumore in Berlin. The Great Mother (Miss Dottini), Prophet (Ottavio
entire experiment on which they were working Cappelli), Chancellor, and Interpreter of Dreams.
would take no less than 1200 days, i.e. until July Grabianka himself was referred to as the “Infallible
1788. King of the New Israel” and all members used to
Most of those who had belonged to the Illuminés throw themselves to the ground before him. There
in Berlin now came to Avignon as well, and new were four degrees in his system, the last one being
members joined. Most of them were Freemasons presided over by the Great Mother.
(Esprit Calvet, De Serriére, Blainville, Chaix de A strange visionary, Ottavio Cappelli, joined the
Sourcesol, Gasqui, the count of Pasquini-Montres- “New Israel” in 1786 or 1787. Grabianka was
son, Gombault du Vignan, the baron Tardy de highly impressed by his visionary gifts (his ques-
Beaufort, the marquis of Montpezat, and the mar- tions were answered by the archangel Raphael),
quis Vernetti-Vaucroze). Very soon, however, the and gave him one of the most exalted positions
new group began to disintegrate again, as founding within his group. But early in 1790, Cappelli was
members left Avignon. One month after the final arrested by the Inquisition, charged with being an
recorded communication by La Sainte Parole (april heretic and a swindler, and threatened with a seven-
1785), Brumore left for Rome, where he died year prison sentence if he did not revoke his errors.
not much later, in February 1786. Shortly after, He did so at once, and was released in november
September 1786, the marquis Vernetti-Vaucroze 1791, but the reputation of the “Illuminés d’ Avi-
offered Pernety a house close to his castle, in Bédar- gnon” (whether this referred to Grabianka’s or Per-
rides, 17 kilometres from Avignon. Pernety called it nety’s group) had been severely damaged, and one
“Mount Tabor”, and turned one room into a tem- member after the other began to leave.
ple, one into a meeting-room, and one into a labo- The medium Brumore was dead, Pernety and
ratory. Grabianka left for London in 1786, where Grabianka had become separated, the Prophet
he visited a Swedenborgian group founded by Cappelli had been condemned by the Inquisition,
Hindmarsh. Without much success he tried here to the alchemical Work had not brought the hoped-
recruit members for his own group in Avignon. To for cure for the diseases of mankind, and the Rev-
a few, he revealed that the Illuminés d’Avignon’s olution of 1789 had not brought the expected New
great secret was that God is not a trinity but con- Jerusalem: in the wake of all these disappoint-
tains a fourth person: Mary, the Mother of God. ments, the Illuminés d’Avignon dispersed around
Not long after Brumore’s death in 1786, for rea- 1792, and were completely abolished the year after.
sons which have remained unclear but may well They had existed for thirteen years, of which seven
have had to do with Grabianka’s quaternarian the- in Avignon. Pernety died in 1796. Grabianka had
ology, the Illuminés split into several fractions. One been forced to leave Avignon four years before, in
group — the “société des Illuminés d’Avignon” — 1792, because of his debts. He fled first to Paris,
continued under Pernety, while another — “the New then in 1799 to London, and finally to Russia.
Israel” — was led by Grabianka. Moreover, a third Arrested and imprisoned in St.Petersburg in April
group — “the Filial Piety” - emerged, under the 1807, on accusation of espionage, he died on Octo-
leadership of the marquis of Montpezat. Pernety’s ber the 6th before the end of his trial. Cappelli was

--- Page 24 ---
ILLUMINES D’AVIGNON 600
hanged in Rome in 1800, probably for political profound affinities with pre-Romanticism and >
reasons. Romanticism.
The emergence of IIluminism shows that the cen-
“Manuscrit de la Sainte Parole des Illuminés d’ Avignon tury of the philosophers of the Enlightenment was
[integral text of MS 3090, Musée Calvet, Avignon]”, in fact a century of contrasts; but nevertheless, it
in: M. Meillassoux-le Cerf, Dom Pernety et les Illu-
would be a simplification to oppose the two move-
minés d’Avignon, suivi de la transcription intégrale de
la Sainte Parole, Milano: Arché Edidit, 1992, 333-448. ments too sharply, seeing one as the partisan of rea-
son, and the other as defending the irrational.
Lit.: Reinhard Breymayer, “‘Elie Artiste’: Johann Criticism of a Cartesian or post-Cartesian reliance
Daniel Miiller de Wissenbach/Nassau (1716 jus- on natural intelligence goes together, in the very
qu’apres 1785): Un aventurier entre le piétisme radical heart of Illuminism, with a desire to make good use
et Villuminisme”, in: Mario Matucci (ed.), Actes du
of reason; but far more than a merely natural
Colloque International Lumieéres et Illuminisme, Pisa:
human capacity, “reason” for them included a spir- Pacini, 1984, 65-84 @ idem, “‘Elias Artista’: Johann
Daniel Miiller aus Wissenbach/Nassau, ein kritischer itual dimension, as formulated by > Karl von
Freund Swedenborgs, und seine Wirkung auf die Eckartshausen (1752-1803): “The inner eye is rea-
Schwabischen Pietisten EC. Oetinger und P.M. Hahn”, son. However, this inner eye must be clarified by
in: Wilhelm Kihlmann (ed.), Literatur und Kultur im the divine light’. What is the nature of this light?
deutschen Siidwesten zwischen Renaissance und Auf- Such was the question that inspired the Illuminist
klarung, Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 1995, 229-371
movement.
@ J. Bricaud: Les Illuminés d’Avignon: étude sur Dom
The Illuminists were adventurers of thought: Pernety et son groupe, Paris: Nourry, 1927 (to be read
with much caution) ¢ M.L. Danilewicz: “‘The King of their minds plunged into the ancient treatises of the
the New Israel’: Thaddeus Grabianka (1740-1807)”, kabbalah [> Jewish Influences], > alchemy, the
Oxford Slavonic Papers, N.S. 1 (1968), 49-73 4 mythologies of the Greeks, or those of the ancient
Antoine Faivre, “Elie Artiste, ou le messie des Egyptians. They also questioned the theosophers
Philosophes de la Nature”, 2 parts, Aries 2:2 (2002),
[> Christian Theosophy] who had preceded them,
119-152/3:1 (2003), 25-54 ® Clarke Garrett, “The
in particular > Jacob Boehme (1575-1624), who
Mystical International”, chp. 5, in: Respectable Folly:
Millenarians and the French Revolution in France and had become known partly thanks to > William
England, Baltimore & London: John Hopkins Univer- Law (1686-1761) in England and > Johann Georg
sity Press, 1975, 97-120 @ Meillassoux-Le Cerf: Dom Gichtel (1638-1710) in Germany, and > Emanuel
Pernety et les Illuminés d’Avignon (see above) ¢ Swedenborg. As part of their quest, they developed
Auguste Viatte, Les sources occultes du romantisme: activities in various directions. They invented new
Illuminisme, Théosophie 1770-1820, vol. 1: Le pré-
rites in order to renovate Christianity; as writers
romantisme (orig. 1927), Paris: Honoré Champion,
they analyzed the evolution of their soul and scru- 1979, 89-103 @ Karl-Erik Sjoden, Swedenborg en
France, Stockholm: Almovist & Wiksell International, tinized the history of their time; as orators they
1985, 23-35. enlivened the salons. Attempting to reconcile sev-
eral intellectual systems, the Illuminists of the 18th
JAN A.M. SNOEK century sought to combine ancient myths with
modern cosmogonies. Sometimes their thoughts
Illuminism became overheated, so that, taken by millenarian
frenzy, they interpreted the events of the present in
I. “CHRISTIANITY OF THE HEART” AND THE the light of the Apocalypse. Seeking a faith that
LIGHT OF REASON 2. SECRET HISTORY, would combine reason and mystical élan, they bore
PROFANE History 3. THE VEILED TRUTH witness to a cultural crisis and the attempt to
4. FORMS OF SOCIABILITY 5. FROM THE resolve it. IIluminism saw itself confronted with the
MYTH TO THE OPERATIVE PATH 6. THE Church’s condemnations of > mysticism, such as
ORACULAR PATH 7. COMMUNICATION WITH that of Fénelon (1651-1715), and with the harden-
THE BEYOND 8. A UNIVERSAL SCIENCE ing of the attitudes of academic scholarship in the
r8th century. The question was how to fray a path
The complex intellectual and spiritual movement in all this. The figures we shall discuss here were
known as “IIluminism” is an integral part of mod- part of an intense process of cross-fertilization that
ern Western esotericism in Europe. Chronologi- ended up engendering a modern kind of spiritual-
cally it covers the last third (or even the second ity. Illuminism touched all of Europe and crossed
half) of the 18th century and the first third of the over to the Anglo-Saxon world. Its complexity
rgth. In the history of ideas and of literature, it has matched the problem that the new society had to

--- Page 25 ---
601 ILLUMINISM
resolve: the collapse of Christianity and the emer- Illuminists tended to see history as a process of pro-
gence of secularism. gressive theophany. They saw themselves as experi-
encing the end of a society based upon hierarchical
rm *CURISTIANITY OP THE HEART” order, and interpreted the social upheavals of their
AND THE LIGHT OF REASON times in terms of prophecies, millenarian expres-
Illuminism was a movement of transition: in a sions, and judgments about the end of time.
society moving towards increasing secularization, Some illuminists were resolutely theocratic, such
they carried on the analogical way of thinking typ- as > Joseph de Maistre (1753-1821) or Saint-Mar-
ical of the magical [> Magic] and alchemical prac- tin. To the latter, the Revolution of 1789 appeared
tices of the Renaissance. -> Mysticism survived in it as a divine warning against human excess; and
as well, in the traditions of e.g. Meister Eckhart faced with it, he put his confidence in God, ‘Far
(1260-1327) and the quietists, > Pierre Poiret from dooming us to the annihilation of all religion,
(1646-1719) and Madame Guyon (1648-1717). providence will cause a religion to be born in the
This was not a mysticism of “saints”, however, but heart of Man. It will be purer than the one which
of believers who were already engaged in projects the sovereigns allow, and which they make disap-
of religious synthesis. In a Christian world torn pear by their very power and human will, but also
apart by the Reforms, the Illuminists wished to find it will no longer be open to infection by the manip-
the “inner” Christ beyond denominations. ulations of the priesthood and the breath of impos-
The Illuminists criticized the excesses of the ture... .’ (Lettre sur la Révolution, 1791). Other
Enlightenment. They deplored the fact that lan- Illuminists allied themselves with the revolution,
guage had been handed over to the grammarians, but interpreted profane history in terms of Provi-
and knowledge to the encyclopaedists: for while dence. For the duchess of Bourbon [> Bathilde
seeming to respect the “letter”, both tended to for- d’Orléans], the Revolution forced people to open
get the “spirit”. In trying to find alternatives, some themselves to Christian virtues. She received in her
Illuminists followed the prudence of the theoso- salon bishop Pontard, accompanied by the prophet
pher ~ Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin (1743- Suzette Labrousse; everything that the latter
1803), who preached the use of reason guided by announced was faithful to the Jacobin spirit of the
divine light and emphasized the prayer of the heart. former. The revolutionary tendency of Illuminism
Others chose the way of power, involving them- inspired the precursors of the socialist utopias, as in
selves in theurgic operations. While many of them + Nicolas Rétif de la Bretonne (1734-1806), who
questioned themselves about the forces of will and in his lectures shows as much sympathy for the qui-
the functions of reason, all of them were looking etist + Antoinette Bourignon as for Mirabeau; or
for the divine as a living spark provided by intui- as in Nicolas de Bonneville (1760-1828), the pub-
tion and revelation. While reading the philosophes, lisher of Saint-Martin and a supporter of agrarian
they developed their own personal systems. Finally, communism. This revolutionary Illuminism must
Illuminism was also influenced by Rousseau’s not be confused with what we find in the order
emphasis on “the heart”. Between the extremes of the > Illuminaten of Bavaria, founded in 1776
of sentimentalism and mystical exaltation, they by Adam Weishaupt under the appearance of a
sought to lay the foundations for a true generosity Masonic order: his goal was a political one, namely
that should take the form of a communion with the abolition of monarchy.
God, nature, and humanity; it should lead to a
flowering of human potential that would benefit Z00THESY erleo AeRwT Hw
themselves and the whole world. The Illuminists believed in a hidden truth outside
the authority of dogmas and established Churches:
2. SECRET HISTORY, PROFANE the secrets of creation and of the other world lay
HISTORY sealed in the mysteries of the ancient traditions [>
Their reflections on the correct use of human fac- Tradition]. Fraternities and lodges became the
ulties went together with a reflection on history. places where these seekers of truth were at home.
The Illuminists inherited a concept of sacred Chris- The Masonic lodges, expanding quickly in Europe
tian history, the eschatology of which unfolded in the first half of the 18th century, often employed
between the text of the Apocalypse and the hope the image of the veil or the cloak. God was hiding
for a kingdom of the Righteous; but they were also behind the emblematic order of the universe and in
disturbed by the events of profane history at the the Scriptures, and invited the “Man of Aspira-
time of the Revolution. As alternative to both, the tion” (l’homme de désir) to try and find him. For >

--- Page 26 ---
ILLUMINISM 602
Jean-Baptiste Willermoz (1730-1824), founder of and the creation of matter. The “corporization” of
“rectified” + Freemasonry, as for Karl von Hund Man meant his exile in the material world, but
(1722-1776), creator of the Strict Templar Obser- could be remedied because God had provided
vance, the idea of an ancient lineage of descent, paths of “atonement”. The desire of salvation is the
whose guardians they were, went together with a magnet, so to speak, that orients the inner work of
taste for gradual disclosure of the truth in the the initiate, whose task is to bring about the
course of multiple initiations. The ability to redemption of the whole of nature (which has
uncover such hidden truths presupposed a pro- fallen together with Man). But the “men of aspi-
found conversion, that took place within the ration” disagreed among themselves about the
“chivalric sanctuaries” based upon a hierarchy of means to achieve this. Some emphasized intellec-
knowledge, and making good use of the well- tual and spiritual methods: the study of systems of
known warning attributed to Saint Paul, ‘Noli symbolism, Holy Scripture, and the sacred nature
altum sapere’. The German mystic Thomas a Kem- of numbers [~ Number Symbolism], combined
pis (1380-1471) had taken recourse to this maxim with prayer of the heart. Others chose the way of
in his De imitatione Christi, a work that was read magic, with theurgy as an interesting example to
by most of the Iliuminists: ‘Do not let yourself be which we will return. The arts of the kabbalah and
puffed up with pride in the arts or sciences; instead, of alchemy were available to aspirants in both
fear that which you have been told. But admit your directions.
ignorance’. There was yet a third path, prefiguring what was
Such prohibitions against the knowledge of later to be known as > spiritualism: the search for
“higher things” had been lifted at the end of the visions, “auricular” perceptions, and automatic
17th century in the wake of Galileo’s scientific dis- writing. A number of Illuminists such as J.C.
coveries, when people came to believe themselves Lavater, > Johann Heinrich Jung-Stilling (1740-
capable of knowing the mysteries of nature and the 1817), and Jean Frederic Oberlin (1740-1826), be-
secrets of God. With respect to that development, came fascinated with such phenomena, later to be
Illuminism presented a rich array of attitudes. The known as “métapsychique” in the French-speaking
current influenced by quietism, or the one that world. This approach was somewhat intermediary
remained faithful to the teachings of Boehme, between that of Swedenborg, who showed the
wanted to reject the pride of intelligence and results of his visionary abilities in his Arcana
seemed to follow the lesson of the Imitation. Coelestia, and that of somnambulism in the wake
According to this perspective, the spirit must turn of marquis de Puységur (1751-1825), who applied
toward the wisdom that inspires it, the “mirror of the magnetic method [> Animal Magnetism] pio-
God” in which the person who surrenders his indi- neered by Franz Anton Mesmer (1734-1815). In
vidual will may contemplate the mysteries. The the wake of Martinés de Pasqually, “spiritualist”
mysticism of William Law, an Anglican priest, is a magnetism was conceived of as an art that could re-
good example of this tendency. However, the Illu- instate the purity of Man before the Fall. This med-
minists’ quest for deciphering the signs of truth iumnistic path gave Willermoz some moments of
could take a much more active turn as well, leading enthusiasm. He investigated the trances of Jeanne
to the quest for an intimate “experience” of the Rochette, and believed for some time in the “divine
object sought for. Self-knowledge could be sought writings” received, as early as 1785, by Marie-
by means of analogical thinking, using the macro- Louise de Monspey, sister of the Grand Profés of
cosm as a mirror of one’s own microcosm. In the Lyons Alexandre de Monspey, who, guided by the
words of > Johann Caspar Lavater (1741-1801), spirit of the Virgin Mary, composed journals filled
‘In us is the key of nature, of Scripture, of the divine with esoteric teachings. Saint-Martin copied the
secrets’. Attention could also be directed to the most important of them, which seemed to confirm
outer world, where seekers deciphered the myster- the doctrines of his master Martinés. Later, how-
ies of a “science of God”. In their books, the 18th- ever, they took an excessively prophetic turn, and
century Illuminists constructed entire cosmogonies the “unknown Agent” believed to be their source
connected with eschatological visions, for example came to display an increasingly Roman Catholic
the one that > Martinés de Pasqually developed in orientation; this made Willermoz reticent, and he
his Traité de la Réintégration. From the primordial finally took his distance from this “new” initiation.
unity of God, or so we read there, myriads of intel-
ligent creatures have emanated, among which Man 4. FORMS OF SOCIABILITY
has a place of central importance. Evil appeared Illuminist forms of sociability largely retained
because the emanated creatures misused their free- the spirit of the pietistic “colleges”, within a struc-
dom, resulting in the separation of Man from God, ture comparable to that of the speculative Lodges.

--- Page 27 ---
603 ILLUMINISM
In the pietistic communities, a single religious sen- there was a rivalry in that regard between men
timent united Christians of all denominations. The of letters, healers, ecclesiastics, and theosophers.
most important of them assembled at Herrnhut Saint-Martin and Lavater crossed paths with >
near Dresden, around Nikolaus Ludwig Zinzen- Cagliostro (1743-1795); for personalities of the
dorf (1700-1760), who as early as 1722 had re- most different kind visited this magus to make up
stored the order of the Moravian Brothers. The their own minds about his famous spirit appari-
quietist conventicles of the preceding century (con- tions. In the third quarter of the century, the Illu-
demned in 1687 by Innocent XI) likewise inspired minist doctrines became a fashion among the
the Illuminists’ taste for Christian fraternities. It is educated circles. Around Nicolas Bergasse (1750-
not certain that these quietists were direct heirs to 1832), co-founder with Mesmer of the first mag-
earlier “illuminated” currents such as the Spanish netic society, there gravitated Swedenborgians such
alumbrados, condemned in the 16th century and as the marquis of Vaucroze, theosophers such as
again in 1623. In any case, there was a persistent Saint-Martin, adepts of magnetism such as the
tendency among the Illuminists to follow a spiri- duchess of Bourbon, and quietists such as Julie de
tual quest outside and parallel to the Church. In Krudener (1764-1824).
the 18th century it was notably the thinking of
Madame Guyon (1648-1717) that guided certain 5. FROM MYTH TO THE OPERATIVE
Illuminists, such as > Niklaus Anton Kirchberger PATH
(1739-1799), toward the idea of the “rest” of the In their writings the Illuminists paid special
soul in its surrender to God. The quietists, assem- attention to basic problems on which the official
bled mainly in the Vaud region, had already devel- Church took a firm position, such as e.g. the origin
oped the concept of an elect group, the members of of evil, the destiny of souls, and the “great chain of
which were requested not to pass on to others the being” leading up to God. In this area their think-
mysteries revealed to them. Their leaders wrote ing was guided by the theosophers of the second
under divine “dictation”, as did Hector de Saint- half of the century: Martinés de Pasqually (1714-
Georges de Marsais (1688-1755), or they prophe- 1774) and Saint-Martin in particular. Their way of
sied, as did Fleischbein (1700-1774). At the death thinking drew support from the great Christian
of the latter, ~ Jean-Philippe Dutoit-Membrini myths, among which that of the Fall occupied a
(1721-1793) took leadership of the Vaud group prominent place. The myth implied a dramatic
and moved its seat to Lausanne. This mystic, a concept of human destiny, and its basic themes of
great reader of the biblical commentaries of loss and return haunted the Illuminists’ visions and
Madame Guyon, put forth in his Philosophie writings. Martinés de Pasqually’s Order of the >
divine (1793) a theory of the “Astral”, populated Elus-Coéns is entirely based on the idea of Reinte-
by beings described as ‘neither angels nor demons’. gration, the major theme of his great Traité (see
Nevertheless, the quietists were averse against a above). If according to this theosopher we are all
concentration on spiritual “marvels” (‘Neither born prophets, and each person must cultivate the
prophecies nor miracles are any proof of adoption gift of vision, it is the elect, more in particular, who
or holiness’, wrote Dutoit), and “visions” were in their quest are able to distinguish among pow-
considered diabolical tricks. ers — that is to say, who know the identity of their
But the scope of Illuminism by no means invisible inspirers, and are able to avoid demonic
remained limited to such small circles. The vast net- influences and the lower “intelligences” believed to
work that they formed over the whole of Europe is populate the “Astral” plane.
attested by their voluminous correspondence, in The theurgic teaching developed by Martinés
which they sought to exchange their “secrets”. In involved the evocations of angelic entities. After
1782, furthermore, Willermoz opened the Convent the disappearance of his master Martinés, Willer-
of Wilhelmsbad, in order to unite the mystical moz reserved such practice for the circle of the most
Masons; and the circle of the Philalethes invited its zealous Masons of Lyons, that of the Grand Profés.
faithful to a Convent in 1784, in order to found a Best known among them were > Frédéric de Saltz-
college of occult sciences. The quest for knowledge mann, Bernard and Jean de Turkheim in Stras-
went together with an ecumenist élan, for example bourg, > Joseph de Maistre in Chambéry, Prunelle
in Lavater, Eckartshausen, Jung-Stilling, Saint- de Liére in Grenoble, and Charles of Hesse-Cassel
Martin, and many others. in North Germany. The testimony of the Profés
The Illuminists read one another’s works and Duroy d’Hauterive, as described by Kirchberger to
discussed them, for example in the salons, and Saint-Martin, suggests that Pasqually’s teachings
these debates sometimes led to conversions. In the involved specific psycho-corporeal techniques; he
home of the duchess of Bourbon (1750-1822), writes about ‘that kind of disorganization in which

--- Page 28 ---
ILLUMINISM 604
he saw his body motionless, as though detached practices is known as the > Illuminés d’Avignon,
from his soul’. The practices of theurgy may also be around > Antoine-Joseph Pernety (1716-1796)
seen as reflecting a quest for “proofs”: the signa- and others. Pernety, a former Benedictine and
ture of the evoked entity, in the shape of fiery char- translator of Swedenborg, wrote in his Fables égyp-
acters, was considered evidence of the presence of tiennes et grecques (1758) that the Egyptian and
the entity in the chamber of the initiate. While Greek legends were veiled descriptions of the
“mystical” Freemasonry, expanding its lodges as secrets of alchemical operations; and in fact the
far as Russia, under the instigation of > Nicolai Great Work was the main concern of these Illu-
Novikov (1744-1818) and > Ivan Vladimir Lopu- minists. They received celestial assistence in the
khin (1756-1816), played an important role in the form of an oracle named the “Holy Word” (behind
development of Illuminism, the operative path, which , as we now know, was hiding a specific per-
supported by Willermoz, remained the adventur- son, Johann Daniel Miller [1716-after 1786]),
ous portion. Those who, like Saint-Martin or which answered questions, and finally caused the
Kirchberger, came to see it as an “inferior science”, group to move from Berlin to Avignon. Willermoz
distanced themselves from it and chose the medita- received information about this new oracle both
tive path. from Baron Friedrich von Tieman, who declared
that ‘he had never seen anything greater’, and from
6. THE ORACULAR PATH the Profés (Masonic grade of the Rectified Scottish
To clarify the different aspects of Illuminism, we Rite) Perisse-Duluc of Lyons. But Willermoz, made
must distinguish between the theurgic practices, cautious by the affair of the Unknown Agent (see
based on a foundational myth; and practices of the above), did not pursue the matter further.
oracular type, that pertain to another approach to
the “supernatural”. Part of the Illuminists were 7. COMMUNICATION WITH THE
certainly moved by desire for tangible manifesta- BEYOND
tions. The “School of the North”, to give one The Illuminists evinced an “experimental” spirit,
example, was led by Charles of Hesse-Cassel but far from having anything to do with that of
(1744-1836), brother-in-law of Christian VIII, king contemporary science, it augured “research” of the
of Denmark, and royal governor of the duchies of kind that would be pursued in the following cen-
Schleswig-Holstein. A fervent Christian, he had a tury in the movement known as spiritualism. The
fascination for alchemy and retained a lifelong tendency of “spiritualist magnetism”, well repre-
devotion to supernatural manifestations. He was sented among the Masons of Lyons, found many
convinced that, by means of special training, he followers, who found this new path more effective
could communicate with the spiritual world. The than that of metaphysical speculations because it
Illuminists of his School of the North practiced promised to give actual demonstrations of the inde-
asceticism and prayer to awaken the mystical fac- pendence of the soul. Abbot Pierre Fournié (173 8-
ulties, and invoked the celestial beings in the course 1827), secretary to Martinés de Pasqually from
of special rites. In his personal notes, discovered by 1769 to 1771, was not content with “visions” or
the historian G. van Rijnberk in the archives of the “auricular” perceptions that put him in contact
Grand Lodge of Copenhagen, Charles of Hesse with the spirit world. Thus he engaged as early as
reported the teachings that gave access to the prac- 1785 in experiments in magnetism, described by
tices. They had been dispensed to him by Hans him as a ‘gift from heaven’ (Ce que nous avons
Heinrich von Ecker-und-Eckhoffen (1750-1790), été .. ., 1801). In such a manner, spiritual magnet-
one of the founders of the > Asiatic Brethren, a ism led some people who were inclined to materi-
para-Masonic society whose seat was in Austria. alism to find the way back to religious faith. Such
The initiates learned how to fix their eyes on was the case of Fournié; but Saint-Martin, as well,
objects or luminous points, in order to develop a stated that ‘Mesmer... has opened the door to
form of clairvoyance. Thus, in the 1790s, Charles perceptible demonstrations of the spirit’ (Oeuvres
of Hesse and his followers used to assemble around Posthumes |Posthumous Works}).
an image of Christ, which lit up at the time of the Illuminism also served as a medium of trans-
invocations. The initiates interpreted these “phos- mission of spiritual techniques. Of the two great
phoric manifestations” in order to obtain answers founding heroes of Illuminism, Boehme and Swe-
to their questions. This example clearly shows to denborg, only the second one was explicit about
what extent Illuminism foreshadowed the spiritu- the conditions necessary for contact with the other
alist phenomena of the rgth century. world, and described the intermediary state be-
Another group of Illuminists devoted to oracular tween sleeping and waking as propitious for reve-

--- Page 29 ---
605 ILLUMINISM
lations. The author of the Arcana coelestia claimed Opposed by the academies, Mesmer described, in
that in order to manifest themselves, the angels his thesis of 1766, the influence of the planets on
communicate an “influx” to people, which the lat- the terrestrial bodies and set out the bases of a uni-
ter in their turn may translate according to their versal therapy. In the last decade of the 18th cen-
own spiritual faculties. The angelic world “corre- tury, we see the vigorous rise of a movement
sponds” with the world of humans; the universe is of thought known as “German idealism”. The
comprised of “discrete degrees” or levels of reality. philosopher > Friedrich Schelling (1775-1854), a
Within such a framework, Swedenborg developed major figure of > Naturphilosophie, perceived in
a physiology of the soul: ‘Just as the sense organs, a flash of intuition the tormented identity of the
external or corporeal, are the receptacles of natural absolute spirit, incarnated in the flux of history and
things, so the organic substances of the internal the life of nature. Within this process of incarna-
senses, of the mental functions, are the receptacles tion, human consciousness is the free point in
of spiritual things’. which the organic movements of the divine uni-
A number of Illuminists, such as Pernety, at- verse is reflected. Human knowledge is the fruit of
tempted to follow this path, even though Sweden- God’s self-perception. > Franz von Baader (1765-
borg himself had emphasized that his revelations 1841), a reader of Boehme and Saint-Martin, was
were unique to him alone. In 1787 a Swedenbor- simultaneously a doctor, theosopher, and mineral-
gian “Société Exégétique et Philanthropique” was ogist. In short tracts of a somewhat baroque
founded, which practiced the art of visions com- beauty, he employed strong imagery (lightning,
bined with the use of magnetic passes. But the anger, hell) to develop the elements of his mystical
most zealous Swedenborgians were hostile to the naturalism.
theosophers, the followers of Martinés or Saint- From this period of intense cultural renewal in
Martin. Thus, for example, the marquis of Thomé, the way of thinking about nature and history,
the first proselytizer of Swedenborg in France, did emerged finally the poet ~ Novalis (1772-1801).
not hide his disagreement with Saint-Martin’s book He grew up in the pietist community of Wierder-
Des erreurs et de la vérité (1775). Clearly the heirs stedt, of which he would always retain the contem-
of Boehme or Martinés had chosen a path different plative attitude. Novalis read not only Kant, but
from Swedenborg’s. If Willermoz retained much also Paracelsus, Jacob Boehme, Franz von Baader,
esteem for the Swedish visionary, he nevertheless and Goethe, pursuing studies in mineralogy and
considered him to have been lacking in “discrimi- organic chemistry before becoming an engineer.
nation” and believed he had sometimes received His life took a tragic turn when his fiancée Sophie
instruction from inferior spirits. The theosophers von Kiihn died in 1795. Love prematurely inter-
came up with their own systems to parry the fail- rupted became the keystone of his mystical quest:
ings of Swedenborg’s visions. Mystics such as ‘this flame consumes little by little that which is
Dutoit-Membrini found him too confused, but an earthly in me’, he wrote to his friend Friedrich
eclectic searcher such as baron Bourrée de Cor- Schlegel. From then on, his life became rather like
beron found inspiration in him: after making the an incarnated I[lluminist myth, in which the resur-
rounds of all the occult sciences, he finally chose, in rected Christ took on the contours of an alchemical
1790, to join the Swedenborgians of Avignon. metaphor. To survive death, for Novalis, is possible
only by making life divine. Novalis met the Ger-
8. A UNIVERSAL SCIENCE man philosopher Fichte, studied under the drama-
Illuminism aspired to making all forms of tist Schiller at Jena, and met Schelling at the end of
knowledge converge in a single crucible that would the 1790s. For this universal spirit, knowledge was
include the sciences. The very separation between “one”: in a network of correspondences, poetry,
religion and science, philosophy and poetry, reason religion, chemistry, and philosophy were com-
and intuition, and aesthetics and politics, was bined. To open oneself to the life of absolute
called into question. “Knowing Nature” meant knowledge, he suggested one must consider poetry
responding to its desire to be unveiled. Inspired by as experience, see that the true knowledge of nature
Boehmenist visions, Antoine de la Salle (1754- is an art, and that the science of numbers is the very
1829) and > Friedrich Christoph Oetinger (1702- life of the gods.
1782) perceived the world as a living body
Lit.: Robert Amadou, Illuminisme et contre-illumi-
engendered by the dynamics of two opposing
nisme au XVIII°” siécle, Paris: Cariscript, 1989
forces. In the theories of Eckartshausen on the Robert Amadou (ed.), L’Illuminisme au XVIII”?
three reigns of nature, the mission of humanity is to siécle (Les Cahiers de la Tour Saint-Jacques), Paris:
“virginize” the earth and the opaque elements. Roudil, 1960 @ Ernst Benz, Les sources mystiques de la

--- Page 30 ---
ILLUMINISM 606
philosophie allemande, Paris: Vrin, 1968 # Christine Together with the “common sense” (to krinon or
Bergé, L’au-dela et les lyonnais: Mages, mystiques et sensus communis) and the memory it belongs to the
Francs-Macons du XVIII°""® au XX°"® siécle, Lyon: so-called “interior senses”; but one also sometimes
LUGD, 1995 # M. Besset, Novalis et la pensée mys-
encounters it as equivalent to these different senses
tique, Paris: Aubier, 1947 Pierre Deghaye, La doc-
taken together. Aristotle says that phantasia trine ésotérique de Zinzendorf, Paris: Klincksieck,
1969 @ Antoine Faivre, Kirchberger et I'Illuminisme au derives from oc (light, or glow) and is primarily
XVIIIe"’, La Haye: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966 @ idem, visually oriented. Its function is to transform sen-
Eckhartshausen et la théosophie chrétienne, Paris: sory impressions into images. The imagination
Klincksieck, 1969 @ idem, “La philosophie de la nature stands under the dominion of reason, which distin-
dans le Romantisme allemand”, in: Encyclopédie de la guishes man from other creatures. Whenever rea-
Pléiade IU, Paris: Gallimard, 1972 idem, Mystiques,
son loses its vigilance, for example during illness or
théosophes et Illuminés au siécle des Lumieres,
sleep, the phantasmata can use the opportunity to Hildesheim/New York: G. Olms, 1976 # M. Neuge-
bauer-Wolk (ed.), Aufklarung und Esoterik, Hamburg: lead their own life and create disturbing effects.
FE. Meiner, 1999 @ Nicole Jacques-Chaquin, “Illumi- In the Latin and Arab tradition there has been
nisme (Occident Moderne)”, in: Jean Servier (ed.), much speculation about how the imagination can
Dictionnaire critique de l’ésotérisme, Paris: Presses influence a person’s own body, but it was some-
Universitaires de France, 1998 @ [No editor], Joseph de
times believed to have the power to influence the
Maistre, illuminisme et Franc-Maconnerie, Actes du
spirit or body of other persons as well, and in a colloque de Chambéry, 4-5 mai 1979, Paris: Les Belles
Lettres, 1981 @ J. Keller, Le théosophe alsacien magical context it could even be the medium by
Frédéric-Rudolph Saltzmann et les milieux spirituels de means of which the magus could cause epidemics,
son temps: Contribution a l’étude de I’Illuminisme et heavy rains or other natural disasters. Due to the
du mysticisme a la fin du XVIII°"® et au début du imagination’s power over the spirit or body of
XIX°"” siecle, 2 vols., Bern/Frankfurt/New York: Peter other persons, it plays a role in theories of love.
Lang, 1985 René Le Forestier, La Franc-Magonnerie
And frequent reference was made to the example,
templiére et occultiste aux X VIII°"® et XIX°”® siécles,
which has its origin in Quintilianus (3 5-96/8), of Paris: Aubier Montaigne, 1970 @ J. Marx, “La lumiére
des Illuminés”, Les Cahiers de Saint-Martin 1 (1976), the influence exerted on the fetus of what the
1-24 @ M. Matucci (ed.), Lumiéres et Illuminisme, mother was seeing at the time of conception, either
Actes du colloque international de Cortona, 3-6 Oct. in her mind or in reality. For example, if she had
1983, Pisa: Pacini, 1984 @ M. Meillassoux-Le Cerf, been thinking of an Ethiopian, the child would be
Dom Pernéty et les Illuminés d’Avignon, suivi de la born black; but if she had been looking at certain
transcription intégrale de la Sainte-Parole, Milan:
images or paintings, the child would be beautiful,
Arché, 1992 @ A. Tanner, Gnostiques de la Révolution:
Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin, Paris/Freiburg: Presses even if the father was ugly. The imagination was
Universitaires de France/Egloff, 1946 # Gérard van also believed to have an influence on animals; a fre-
Rijnberk, Un thaumaturge au XVIII°"® siecle: Mar- quent example was the story of Jacob, whose cattle
tinez de Pasqually, Lyon: Raclet, 1938 (repr. 1980) produced striped or speckled offspring because he
Auguste Viatte, Les sources occultes du Romantisme: had put patterned rods in the water troughs (Gen.
Illuminisme et Théosophie (1770-1820), 2 vols., Paris:
30:2 5-43). Champion, 1928 (repr. 1970).
Finally, in a mystical and esoteric context the
CHRISTINE BERGE imagination has been believed to give access to
levels of reality deeper than those that can be expe-
rienced by the senses, and thus to function as a
Imagination domain of mediation between different ontological
planes. As such it enables man to transcend the
1. CLASSICAL THEORIES material world and gain access to the divine. In
(A. ARISTOTELIANISM B. GALENISM other words, the imagination could become a
c. NEOPLATONISM AND HERMETISM) bridge between microcosm and macrocosm.
2. MEDIEVAL THEORIES (A. ARABIC
AUTHORS B. LATIN AUTHORS) 3. THE I. CLASSICAL THEORIES
RENAISSANCE SYNTHESIS 4. THE CREATIVE In Greek philosophy and in later Latin tradi-
IMAGINATION 5. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE tions, three main currents can be distinguished con-
I9TH AND 20TH CENTURIES cerning theories of the imagination: an
Aristotelian, a Galenist, and a Neoplatonic one.
According to a tradition derived from Aristotle,
the imagination (Greek phantasia; Latin: imagina- A. ARISTOTELIANISM
tio) isa faculty of knowledge intermediary between The Aristotelian current has been most influen-
the senses and the intellect or rational intelligence. tial. Aristotle limits his treatment of the concept of

--- Page 31 ---
607 IMAGINATION
phantasia to the part of the soul that is concerned by the Stoics, and in particular by Zeno of Citium
with perception. In his Parva naturalia and De (333-264 BC). The theory of pneuma is central to
anima he adds to the five senses a sixth function, the analogical worldview which provided a foun-
called the sensus communis, which compares the dation for the magic of late antiquity. For the
experiences of the senses with one another and Stoics, the pneuma permeates the entire body and
bestows unity on them. Qualities such as time, size, governs its activities. The “governing power”
number and movement, which influence more than (hegemonikon) resides in the heart; there it receives
one sense, belong to the sensus communis. To this, the pneumatic currents from all the senses and con-
Aristotle adds the term phantasia (De Anima Ill, 3, verts them into phantasmata that can be under-
429 a 1-2). On the one hand, it stands for a sense stood by the intellect. The hegemonikon organizes
impression which differs from other sense experi- the information it receives, and produces impres-
ences, in that it continues to exist even when the sions in the human soul.
object that caused it is no longer present. On the According to Couliano the phantasm has pri-
other hand, it stands for the cognitive power by macy over the word because in terms of classical
means of which we can make an image appear in theory, the soul dominates the body; accordingly,
our mind. thinking precedes language. It follows that, next to
Aristotle’s most consistent statement about a grammar of spoken language, there must exist a
phantasia is that it forms a bridge between percep- grammar of thought independent of language.
tion and intellect, because the soul does not think Only the intellect is capable of understanding this
without images (De Anima Ill, 7, 431 a 16). In De “phantastic grammar”. The attempt to understand
Memoria he remarks that the memory and the this grammar and thus gain access to the hidden
imagination are both connected with the “common powers of the soul would become basic, Couliano
sense”, and thus with the “primary perceptive concludes, to ‘all the phantasmic processes of the
power” (to proton aisthetikon). The latter is Renaissance: Eros, the Art of Memory, theoretical
located in the heart, which is the most important magic, alchemy, and practical magic’ (1987, 6).
organ and the source of all bodily functions. Sen-
sory impressions are led from the senses to the B. GALENISM
heart by means of the spirit or pneuma (to sym- Galenus (129-ca. 201), court physician of Mar-
phyton pneuma; De insomniis, 3, 461 b 13-25): a cus Aurelius, further develops the aristotelian
vaporous substance consisting of the same matter approach. According to him, the power of percep-
from which the stars are made. Having arrived in tion is not located in the heart but in the brain. The
the heart, the messages originating in the five bod- brain functions consist of perception, movement
ily senses are transformed there in such a manner and the hegemonikon. The latter is threefold, con-
that they can be understood by the soul. This is sisting of a phantastic part (phantastikon), a rational
done by the phantasia, which translates the infor- part (dianoetikon) and the memory (mnemoneu-
mation received from the senses into phantasmata. tikon) (De symptomatum differentiis, 3). All these
As for the pneuma, it is also the instrument that brain functions make use of the “spirits” or pneuma
makes it possible for the soul to communicate with psychikon as their instrument (De locis affectis, II,
the body, and to cause it to perform all vital activi- 9; note that whereas the pneuma psychikon is
ties, including movement. Referred to as proton located in the brain, Galenus distinguishes it from
organon, it bridges the gap between the physical the vital pneuma, located in the left ventricle of the
and the nonphysical: it is so subtle that it comes heart. He believes that through the arteries there
close to the immaterial soul but it is nevertheless flows a mixture of blood and pneuma).
material, so that it can communicate with the For Galenus, the phantasia seems to have a func-
world of the senses. Without the pneuma, body and tion similar to that in Aristotle: it enables the soul
soul would not be aware of one another. Ontolog- to store sensory impressions, and it contains men-
ically, the soul has no window towards the material tal images. Like other bodily functions, the phan-
world; and as for the body, it is merely a combina- tasia is subject to physical disturbances, which in
tion of natural elements that would immediately Galenus’ theory are almost invariably linked to a
fall apart without the soul. disbalance of the bodily fluids: blood, phlegm, and
Aristotelian concepts of pneuma were based red and black bile. A surplus of black bile, or
upon the medical theories of authors such as melancholy, leads to a cold and dry spirit and may
Alcmaeon of Croton (ca. 500-450 BC), Empedo- cause the imagination to degenerate into hallucina-
cles (ca. 450 BC) and Hippocrates (460-377 BC). tions (De locis affectis, Ill, 10).
After Aristotle, the idea that spiritual processes can Galenus’ threefold hegemonikon was adopted by
be explained physiologically was further developed later authors, and located in the brain ventricles.

--- Page 32 ---
IMAGINATION 608
Thus the Syrian bishop Nemesius of Emesa (4th is liberated from it at death (Phaedo 63-69, 81a); a
century CE) writes in his De natura hominis that similar idea is also found in the Phaedrus. But later,
the phantastikon is located in the brain’s front part, in the Timaeus, Plato is much more positive about
the dianoetikon in the middle, and the mnemoneu- the material world, which has been carefully built
tikon in the back. This theory was adopted by by the demiurge, in imitation of a prototype in his
Johannes Damascenus (670-ca. 753 CE) in his De own spirit (Timaeus 29-30). Accordingly, in Ploti-
fide orthodoxa, and by early Arabic medical nus one may find passages according to which the
authors. soul is dragged down by matter, as well as others
according to which the soul moulds formless mat-
c. NEOPLATONISM ter into a splendid reflection of the higher world.
Neoplatonism assigned a much more important The Neoplatonists who followed in Plotinus’
role to the imagination than the Aristotelian and footsteps developed theurgical practices in order to
Galenist currents. According to Plotinus, at birth restore the contact between man and the divine,
the human soul descends from the intelligible and here the phantasia played an important role.
world, that consists of the so-called “three first Iamblichus and Proclus identify the “phantastic
principles” or hypostases: the One, the Intellect pneuma” of the Aristotelian and Galenist tradition
(Nous) and the (World-)Soul (Psyche). All the indi- with the ethereal body or ochéma, the subtle sub-
vidual human souls emanate from the Nous in stance that according to Neoplatonic metaphysics
order to unite with the lower material world. In surrounds the soul. Because the ethereal body has a
death, but also in states of contemplation during subtle material nature, the phantasia that resides
life, they can return to the splendour of the intelli- in it can react to sensory impressions such as
gible world. Note, however, that according to smells, vapours and sounds; accordingly it can be
Plotinus a small part of the human soul always influenced by ritual practices that involve e.g. fast-
remains in the intelligible world (Enn. IV.8.8.1-4; ing, incense and spoken formulas. As part of the
IV.3.12.1-5; I.1). ethereal body, the phantasia continues to exist after
In Plotinus, the soul’s functions are intellect the death of the material body.
(dianoia), reason (nous) and the imagination (note In De insomniis of the bishop Synesius of Cyrene
that the distinction between reason and intellect is (ca. 373-ca. 414) the imagination gains cosmic
obscured by the fact that sometimes Plotinus uses importance: even prior to incarnation it has the
the word nous for both, next to the already men- capacity of storing information that derives from
tioned hypostasis Nous [Blumenthal 1996, 91]). the planetary spheres and the metaphysical realm.
The lower part of the imagination deals with sen- Dreams, visions, prophecies and other functions
sory perception, and is sometimes referred to as of the phantasia are given a key role in philosophi-
“nature” (physis); the higher part of the imagina- cal discussion and religious practice. Generally
tion consists of the phantastikon. All these func- speaking, the Neoplatonists believed that the imag-
tions of the soul are located in the brain, the ination, being part of the ethereal body, can be
phantastikon being the connecting link between influenced by smells, vapours and sounds; these are
the lower and higher part of the soul. On the one also capable of attracting powers from the world
hand it is connected with thinking, but it belongs to soul. Plotinus also speaks about attracting the
the lower part of the soul and cannot be separated world soul by means of statues, which like a mirror
from matter, the experiences of the body and the can receive its image (Enn. IV, 3, rr). This idea was
humors that influence the body. The soul as a transmitted by several important Arabic thinkers,
whole again plays a mediating role between the and it has also influenced Renaissance philosphers
higher and the lower world. like Ficino. Thus the imagination came to play a
Although Plotinus speaks of “parts” of the soul, functional role in magical practice.
he repeatedly emphasizes its essential unity.
According to him, man must submit his imagina- 2. MEDIEVAL THEORIES
tion to the intellect in order to escape the lures of
the body. For only if the imagination is held in A. ARABIC THINKERS
check, will the soul be able to leave the material The works of Aristotle, Galen and the Neopla-
world behind and ascend to the intelligible world. tonists were translated into Arabic, and from the
There is a peculiar ambiguity in Plotinus’ gth century onwards philosophy and the sciences
descriptions of the soul, which has its background’s were flourishing in the Islamic world. This created
in Plato. In the Phaedo we find the idea that the a fertile context for further theories about the
soul resides in the body as though in a prison, and imagination and the faculties of the soul.

--- Page 33 ---
609 IMAGINATION
In > al-Kindi’s theory of rays, the imagination verse in which influences can move into all direc-
plays an important role in explaining magical tions, whereas the scholastic worldview recognized
effects. According to al-Kindi every thing in the only an influence of the higher over the lower.
machina mundana has a center that, like the stars, According to Rahman (1964, 168-169), some
sends out rays. The human imagination also sends Arabic thinkers assigned to the imagination an
out such rays, by means of which it can imprint ontological status much more important than what
forms into matter; as a result, man is able to exert is found in the classical Neoplatonists. For exam-
a strong influence on matter. ple, Porphyry described how after death the soul
According to > Avicenna, as well, the soul has leaves the body by means of the ochéma, which
significant power over matter, which is subject to it. eventually is left behind as well. Avicenna, how-
The soul, if properly cleansed of bodily impurities, ever, believed that the soul takes the imaginatio
can function like a mirror that receives the astral with it; it is by means of the imagination that the
powers and reflect them on to the environment. soul can experience the pains of hell or the state
Whatever is present in the imagination, it can of heavenly bliss. These pains and pleasures are
transmit to matter, thereby becoming a dator for- both real and unreal, in a manner comparable to
marum. By virtue of the imagination, the soul can dreams. Al-Suhrawardi (1154-1191) discussed the
also cure illnesses or produce rain and fertility, as “realm of suspended images” as a world in
well as natural disasters or epidemics. The magus between the material and the spiritual, where the
can use the powers of the soul to act at distance, soul after death experiences the quasi-physical
thus becoming like an earthly god. All this is possi- pleasures of paradise or the pains of hell. The imag-
ble because the soul is related to the formative prin- ination here takes over the role of sensory experi-
ciples. Avicenna also adopts Aristotelian theories ences. Moreover, images from this realm can
about the powers of the soul, and orders them manifest themselves in the material world as
within a comprehensive hierarchy. Parallel to the demons or devils.
five senses of exterior perception, there are five Finally, the powers of the soul are also discussed
inner senses: the sensus communis (common in the famous Picatrix (Ghayat al-Hakim fi'l-sihr).
sense), the imaginatio (which contains images), the It claims that man has not only a vegetative and an
phantasia (which combines them), the vis aestima- animal soul, but also a “logical soul” that distin-
tiva (which judges them) and the memoria (which guishes him from other creatures (III, 6). The logi-
remembers them). These five functions are located cal soul produces the arts (artes), makes what is
in the three parts of the brain, which is reminiscent absent present in thought, and creates images, such
of Galen. as those seen in dreams. The Picatrix also presents
Al-Ghazali (ca. 1059-1111) likewise discusses the pneuma as a magical force, referring in that
the far-reaching powers of the soul, which is onto- regard to such authorities as > Hermes Trismegis-
logically superior to matter and can imprint forms tus, and applying it to subjects such as talismans; as
onto it at will. Just like the astral powers influence is well known, such elements have influenced the
the sublunar sphere, the soul can influence the thinking of Marsilio Ficino.
material world. The magus would even be able, or
so he claims, to force a camel into a turkish bath. B. LATIN AUTHORS
Like other Arabic thinkers, he considers several From the end of the rith century, the major
options to account for these powers of the soul: Greek and Arabic works were translated into
they might be mediated by vapours, particles, spir- Latin; and there was a revival of philosophical dis-
its, or rays. Al-Ghazali considers that the imagina- cussion about the soul and its faculties. Two main
tion is put into action by means of fascinatio, which periods may be distinguished: one from ca. 1190-
has a power of enchantment like love, and works 1220, largely dominated by Christian Neoplaton-
by means of sympathy and antipathy. The lover ism, and one from 1220 on, when Aristotelianism
seeks to enchant the beloved by whispering sweet gained the upper hand.
words, and the magus works similarly, transmit- The most influential work on the soul and the
ting by way of his eyes the particles by means of imagination from the first period is the Liber de
which he submits a weaker mind to his own. Al- spiritu et anima, ascribed to Alcher of Clairvaux. It
Ghazali believes that by means of fascinatio one is a collection of various Christian thinkers, includ-
can disturb another person’s mind, and even kill ing > Augustine (3 54-430), Alcuinus (ca. 732-804)
him (something which, by the way, was emphati- and Hugh of St. Victor (1096-1141), but Alcher
cally denied by > Albertus Magnus). The magical also appears to be familiar with Plotinus. The soul’s
imagination has its place within a “holistic” uni- ascent and liberation from the material world is

--- Page 34 ---
IMAGINATION 610
presented as the goal that gives meaning to human and Thomas of Celano (ca. 1200-ca. 1255). Its
life; and this is described as a process of interior concomitant physio-pathological theories spread
ascent through the realms of the soul. Along the beyond university circles and influenced literary
lines of Boethius (ca. 480-ca. 525), the powers of theories about love, for example in Andreas Cap-
the soul are presented as sensory perception, imag- pelanus (De amore, ca. 1185), Guillaume de Lorris
ination, reason, and intellect. Again, the imagina- and Jean de Meung (Roman de la Rose, 1230-
tion here plays the role of mediator between the 1275), and > Dante and the Dolce Stil Novo (ca.
material world and the world of the intellect, 1300). In these traditions we find the idea that a
thereby highlighting man’s inner duality. In order woman’s phantasmata may take possession of her
to see God, the soul must separate itself from the lover’s pneumatic system. Complex games may be
imagination that binds it to matter; the result is a played with the relation between illusion and real-
christianization of Neoplatonic theurgy, which has ity, and sometimes the literary work is presented as
become an inner mystical ascent by means of con- a dream.
templation. The Liber de spiritu et anima also con-
tains Galenist elements, such as the notion that the 3. THE RENAISSANCE SYNTHESIS
imagination is subject to the bodily fluids. To give Since the 15th century, new translations of
one example, it is claimed that the dreams of cho- ancient authorities and the discovery of previously
lerics are different from those of melancholics. unknown authors caused the theory of the imagi-
During the second period, theories about the nation to develop into new directions. For exam-
imagination take the form of commentaries on ple, the physician Niccola Tignosi da Foligno
Aristotle’s De anima. > Albertus Magnus provides (1402-1474) used a new translation of Aristotle’s
discussions about the soul with an Aristotelian De anima by Johannes Argyropoulos (1410-1487).
foundation, referring to authors like Avicenna. He He remarked that Aristotle in fact mentioned only
adopts the latter’s series of five inner senses (see three inner senses (sensus communis, imaginatio,
above). The imaginatio makes it possible to per- memoria), since — contrary to Avicenna and Alber-
ceive the qualities of an image if its original is tus Magnus — he considered the imaginatio, the
absent, and it produces a reservoir of images that phantasia and the vis aestimativa as one single
can be used for thinking, dreams and visions. The function. This point was developed even more pro-
phantasia’s function is to distinguish such images nouncedly by his pupil > Marsilio Ficino, who
and re-combine them, thereby creating new images builds upon Neoplatonic, Aristotelian, Galenist
(e.g. that of a centaur). In terms of Aristotelian phi- and medieval traditions, but whose ideas about the
losophy of nature, imaginatio is preferably “cold imagination constitute an important new phase of
and hard”, because it must be able to solidly retain development. Due to Ficino’s translations of Plato,
the forms (in this context the imagination is fre- the Corpus Hermeticum, > Plotinus, Porphyry,
quently compared with wax); phantasia, on the Proclus, Iamblichus, Synesius and ~ Pseudo-
other hand, must be “warm and moist” so as to Dionysius Areopagita, Neoplatonic notions came
enable the images to flow into one another. Alber- to play a dominant role in his concept of the soul.
tus also describes the location of these functions in Ficino discusses the imagination particularly in his
the brain ventricles: the sensus communis and Theologia Platonica XIII, his commentaries on
imaginatio are in the first ventricle, the phantasia Priscianus Lydus and on Plato’s Phaedrus, and his
and vis aestimativa in the second, and the memoria De vita coelitus comparanda. A certain ambiva-
in the third. The connecting element is, again, the lence about the soul and the imagination that we
pneuma or spiritus, which flows from the last ven- already found in Plotinus can be encountered in
tricle to the spinal sinews and thus mediates Ficino as well.
between the brain and the bodily movements. Due Ficino’s less than positive opinions about the
to this connection certain physical disturbances imagination are particularly clear in his Theologia
may cause hallucinations. Albertus’s theory of the Platonica and his commentary on the Phaedrus. In
inner senses is dependent on classical as well as the former, Ficino adopts Boethius’ powers of the
Arabic thinkers, and may also reflect the influence soul (sensory perception, imagination, reason,
of Costa ben Luca’s (864-923) De differentia ani- intellect) and associates them with the steps by
mae et spiritus. Albertus’s model was adopted inter means of which the soul can gradually elevate itself
alia by Thomas Aquinas (ca.1225 - 1274). to the divine world (see e.g. Theol. Plat. XVI, 3).
The imagination also influenced Franciscus of He describes an eternal process of descent and
Assisi’s theory about the stigmata, as reflected in ascent, in which light moves downward from the
particular by Jacobus of Voragine (ca. 1230-1298) divine world down to the world of matter and

--- Page 35 ---
611 IMAGINATION
the soul reversely moves upwards to reunite with ter, it can be seen as “the human faculty as such”: it
the divine light. As emphasized by Michael Allen may be used for good as well as for evil (cf. Gio-
(1984, 61), this ascent of the soul is primarily a vanni Pico della Mirandola’s similar emphasis on
spiritual and internal one. The highest part of the man as located in the centre of creation, and free to
human soul is the intellect, which directly reflects direct himself upwards to the divine or move
the divine light like a mirror; in relation to it, rea- downwards to the level of beasts). Gianfrancesco
son and imagination are like shadows of the intel- Pico was the first to call attention to the shift of
lect. Referring to the Phaedrus’ famous image of meaning that had taken place from the Greek
the soul’s chariot, Ficino compared the imagination phantasia, literally meaning “sense impression”, to
with the bad horse. the Latin translation imaginatio, which refers
However, the imagination and the senses also rather to a faculty of the soul. Like Ficino, Gian-
have more positive functions in Ficino’s thought. francesco Pico tends to unite all the inner senses
Since man is created after God’s image, his soul under the heading of “imaginatio”. Our imagina-
contains the images of the basic principles or ideas tion depends on the bodily temperaments, on our
after which the world has been created. Knowledge perceptions of things, on our faculty of judgment,
of these ideas is therefore potentially present in the and on the influence of demons or angels. As
soul, and can be actualized by the experience of regards our faculty of judgment, we can and should
sensual beauty, as a result of which the soul remem- allow it to be led by our intellect (dianoia) and our
bers the beauty of the divine ideas. Thus it is by reason (nous). With reference to the Enchiridion of
means of the senses and the imagination that man the Stoic author Epictetus (then recently translated
is reminded of his divine origin. Furthermore, the from the Greek by Angelo Poliziano [145 4-1493]),
soul may ascend by means of the so-called furores Gianfrancesco describes how these functions can
(frenzies): states of ecstasy particularly associated be used against the irrationality of the imagination.
with melancholics, whose high concentration of It is through the intellect that man can have access
black bile in the body amplifies their faculty of to the angels and pure spirits who serve God.
imagination. Ficino’s De vita coelitus comparanda Gianfrancesco Pico’s De imaginatione was trans-
(written shortly after his translation of Synesius, lated into French by Jean-Antoine de Baif (1532-
who among the Neoplatonists attaches most 1589), member of the Pléiade and one of the
importance to the power of the imagination) founders of the Académie de poesie et de musique.
describes how one may attract the astral powers by Influenced by Ficino, the main goal of this academy
means of smells, vapours, sounds, and images. If, in was to use > music so as to have a beneficent effect
such contexts, one merely relies on the > corre- on the moral and emotional faculties of the listener.
spondences between materials and their astral Music could do this by means of the imagination.
counterparts, the effect is less strong than if one Ficino had already discussed the imagination in
adds the power of the imagination. Furthermore, relation with music and poetry; and indeed,
Ficino describes the beneficent effect of making and already in late antiquity connections with the arts
contemplating an imago mundi: an image of the had been drawn by e.g. Quintilianus and Philostra-
universe. As suggested by Frances A. Yates, such tus (ca. 171-ca. 247), who were much read in 1 5th-
passages may reflect the influence of the Corpus century humanist circles. Connections between the
Hermeticum, particularly C.H. XI, 18-22, which imagination and the visual arts began to be drawn
describes how one should imagine oneself to be in 15th-century Italian art theory, notably with
present in the entire universe; and she also brings Filarete (ca. 1400-1469) and Leonardo da Vinci
them in connection with the classical art of mem- (1452-1519), who discussed the imagination as an
ory [> Mnemonics]. “inner sense”. From the 16th century on, the imag-
Gianfrancesco Pico della Mirandola’s (1469- ination became a topic in art-theoretical treatises
1533) De imaginatione is largely Aristotelian, and by authors such as Gian Paolo Lomazzo (1538-
strongly influenced by Savonarola (1452-1498). In 1600) and Federico Zuccari (1540-1609). Simulta-
the context of a strongly ascetic type of personal neously, of course, it played a prominent role in the
piety, it emphasizes that without divine grace and new tradition of Renaissance magic that developed
revelation the human mind is incapable of gaining in the wake of Ficino, with > Cornelius Agrippa’s
access to religious truth. Like Ficino, Gianfran- De occulta philosophia (esp. 1, 61-68; Ill, 43) as a
cesco Pico adopts Boethius’ four powers of the particularly prominent example. In all the authors
soul, with the imagination as the connecting link associated with this trend, traditional notions of
between corporeal and incorporeal realities. Be- the imagination are routinely described as an obvi-
cause the imagination connects the soul with mat- ous part of what magia naturalis is all about; but

--- Page 36 ---
IMAGINATION 612
with the notably exception of a new tradition Arabic, or, most of all, Jewish traditions), he is
started by > Paracelsus (see below), no important nevertheless at the origin of an innovative dis-
innovations seem to have taken place on the theo- course of the imagination that can be traced
retical level. through Christian theosophical authors up to Ger-
Gianfrancesco Pico della Mirandola must also be man > Romanticism and beyond. Clearly indebted
mentioned as an important early representative of to Florentine (neo)platonism and the occult
the “anti-hermetic reaction” that developed during philosophies that emanated from it, Paracelsus did
the 16th century in reaction to the new popularity inherit the full range of traditional notions of the
of magia naturalis, and that questioned the alleged imagination considered as a cognitive faculty of the
“transitive” powers of the imagination (i.e., its soul or as a power that could “magically” influence
ability to influence the external world). Pico’s De one’s own body or the external world, and he abun-
rerum praenotione (1506-1507) contains a general dantly used them in his medical work. He went
attack on the magical tradition, with an entire beyond them, however, in presenting the imagina-
chapter devoted to al-Kindi’s theory, and his Strix, tion as not just a human faculty but a fundamental
sive de ludificatione daemonum (1523) addresses cosmic power of creation, crucially connected with
the > witchcraft controversy with frequent refer- will and desire. Using a strongly organic and sexu-
ences to the imagination. Another crucial author in alized language — replete with images of concep-
this context, the protestant Thomas Erastus (1524- tion, generation, birth and incarnation — Paracelsus
1583), strongly refuted belief in the transitive pow- describes how the soul, spurned by desire, uses the
ers of the imagination in the first volume of his power of the imagination to create images, which
Disputationes de medicina nova Paracelsi (1571). are, quite literally, the “bodily” incarnations of
Alain Godet (1982, 49) emphasizes the political thought. As formulated by Alexandre Koyré (1971,
implications: if the natural faculty of the imagina- 98): ‘The image is a body in which the thought and
tion was not capable of influencing the outside the will of the soul are incarnated. The soul that
world, the magical powers that witches were gives birth to thoughts, ideas, and desires, gives
believed to possess could only be explained by help them an existence sui generis by means of the imag-
from the devil. Refutations of magia naturalis in ination’. It is likewise by means of the imagination
the Ficinian tradition could therefore function as that God’s primal will or desire “magically” cre-
legitimation for the witchcraft persecutions. The ated — or rather, gave birth to — the world; and the
essentials of Erastus’ criticism of the imagination creation of the macrosmic heaven is mirrored by
were repeated by a whole series of later Protestant that of the human microcosm: *... just like a
authors, such as e.g. Georg Gédelmann (Tractatus human being builds earth according to his will and
de Magis, Veneficis et Lamiis ..., 1591) or Otto by means of his body, by means of his imagination
Casmann (Angelographia, 1597); but the transitive he also builds heaven in his own Gestirn .. . the
powers of the imagination are also rejected by imagination is confirmed and completed by faith . . .
authors in the Roman Catholic camp, such as e.g. Fantasy is not Imaginatio, but a cornerstone of
Martin del Rio (Disquisitiones magicae |1599- fools...’ (Sudhoff ed., X, 474-475). The latter dis-
1600], I, 3) and, perhaps surprisingly, > Tommaso tinction would remain a staple of the imagination
Campanella (De sensu rerum et magia [1620], discourse in the following centuries: fantasy,
IV, 2). according to Paracelsus, merely consists of uncon-
nected images floating around in our mind, which
4. THE CREATIVE IMAGINATION may lead us astray but are devoid of inherent power.
The authors discussed so far typically belonged The imagination, in sharp contrast, is grounded in
to highly educated intellectual elites, and devel- the very nature of being; focused and carried by the
oped their theories by means of the essentially con- will, it is the magical power par excellence for
servative method of exegetical commentary on which almost nothing is impossible.
earlier authorities. This changes with the visionary This amplification of the imagination into a
rather than exegetical and erudite discourse initi- creative power of cosmic proportions, within an
ated by Paracelsus, who lay the foundations of organic, sexualized and visionary (rather than
what might be called the “creative imagination”. exegetical) discourse, is abundantly present in a
Although traditional perceptions of Paracelsus as a variety of later Paracelsian authors. For > Joan
wholly independent creative genius are untenable Baptista van Helmont, for example, the power of
(and reflective of Third Reich ideologies: Paracel- the imagination is central to all life processes (gen-
sus as the quintessentially Germanic hero, the eration, birth, and the maintenance of organic life)
“Luther of medicine” uninfluenced by Galenic, as well as to the uniquely human power of bringing

--- Page 37 ---
613 IMAGINATION
forth new creative ideas; and for Oswald Croll, it is theogonic and cosmogonic power of creation itself.
due to his “vis imaginativa” that the human micro- Diametrically opposed to common present-day
cosm has unlimited power to work in the macro- notions of “reality versus (mere) imagination”, the
cosm (Godet 1982, 90-94). Typical for later (divine) imagination and its products are the very
paracelsian and related discourses is the strong essence of reality. This fundamental notion would,
emphasis on “incarnational” language, suggesting eventually, lead to the opposition typical of Ger-
that by means of the imagination the human mind man Romanticism (paradigmatically in authors
is capable of creating “entities” with a quasi- such as > Schubert or > Kerner) between “Nature”
autonomous existence. Such a notion is, however, [Natur] and “Reality” [Wirklichkeit]: the former
certainly not rooted in Paracelsus alone. For exam- refers to the deeper spiritual being of the world, to
ple, already Ficino suggested that by means of which the human soul has access by means of the
music one may create ‘a kind of airy and rational imagination, whereas the latter is a limited and
animal’ (De vita coelitus comparanda 21, 81-85; artificial illusion created by the blindness of the
cf. Allen 1989, ch. 5); he could find support for merely rational mind. Thus the cold and hard light
such notions already in al-Kindi, who wrote that of reason causes reality to petrify into an impover-
‘when man, using his imagination, conceives of ished caricature of its actual being; but this “day-
some corporeal thing, this thing acquires an actual light perspective” dominated by mere rationality is
existence according to the species in the imagina- opposed against the “nightside of nature” (Crowe
tive spirit’ (De radiis V); and > Lazzarelli believed 1848) dominated by the soul and its deep imagina-
that the regenerated “new man” is capable of liter- tive powers, that awaken during our sleep and
ally creating souls (Crater Hermetis 27.1ff). Ac- cause us to experience dreams, but are also evident
cording to later authors such as e.g. Fabio Paolini, in various “occult” phenomena considered anom-
‘feelings and conceptions of our souls can by the alous from a rationalist perspective. The terms
force of the imagination be rendered volatile and magia and imagination are considered etymologi-
corporeal, so that, in accordance with their quality, cally related, as reflective of their profound inter-
they can be carried up to certain stars and planets connection in terms of an “enchanted world”. This
[and] will come down again to us and will obey Romantic perspective was the outcome of a long
us in whatever we want’ (Hebdomades, 1589; see development, leading from the time of Boehme
Walker 1958, 136). More research would be through the various representatives of > Christian
needed to trace the precise historical development theosophy of the 17th and 18th centuries, many of
of such notions, and to determine the relative whom (e.g. > Jane Lead, > John Pordage or >
importance of neoplatonic, kabbalistic and para- Johann Georg Gichtel), were primarily visionaries
celsian notions. who, one might say, are actually describing the
The paracelsian combination of imagination with contents and products of their own creative imagi-
desire came to full development in > Jacob nation. The theosophical discourse on the imagina-
Boehme’s cosmology. The “birth of God” as tion was further developed by important 18th- and
described by Boehme begins with the primal desire rgth-century theosophers such as > Louis-Claude
awakening in the Ungrund, that wants to know de Saint-Martin and > Franz von Baader (see
itself. First, it is by means of the imagination that Faivre 2000, esp. 143-149), and continued beyond
the Ungrund conjures up the image of Wisdom the Romantic period in various late- and postro-
(Sophia), as a mirror in which it can contemplate mantic forms, such as e.g. Baudelaire. The red
itself; and next, burning with desire to unite with thread in this complex historical development
that image, it takes possession of it and uses the cre- consists of an emphasis on the human faculty of
ative power of the imagination to give it concrete imagination as safeguarding the possibility of over-
form, thereby literally engendering and giving birth coming the effects of the Fall - whether caused by
to “Eternal Nature” — the manifestation of God as Lucifer’s rebellion or reflected in the hubris of mere
a pleromatic body of light. While originally desire human reason — and finding the way back to the
and imagination were inextricably linked, they reintegration with (and of) Eternal Nature, the
became separated when the paradisical unity was body of God.
broken and desire degenerated into what Boehme
calls Begierde; as felicitously formulated by Faivre 5. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE 19TH
(2000, 106), ‘the original fall was nothing more AND 20TH CENTURIES
than a perversion of desire by the imagination’. In the wake of the Enlightenment and Romanti-
Here we see clearly how, mediated by Paracelsus, cism, the theme of the imagination has been taken
the imagination has become, first and foremost, the up by a variety of authors, especially in the field of

--- Page 38 ---
IMAGINATION 614
literature and literary criticism. It is as yet far from made it possible for some mesmerists — referred to
clear to what extent the ideas of e.g. Voltaire (who as the “imaginationist” current — to argue that the
distinguished between the undisciplined “passive magnetizer’s will had the effect of liberating the
imagination” and the “active imagination” charac- powers of the patient’s imagination, which were
teristic of genius), Diderot (who denied that the considered capable of completely re-organizing
imagination has any creative powers), Coleridge his/her psycho-organic system (Méheust 1999, I,
(with his famous distinctions between the primary 138, 330-334).
imagination, secondary imagination, and fancy — The close connections that had been drawn, ever
distinctions that are commonly, although incor- since Paracelsus, between the “imagination” and
rectly, assumed to have been invented by him), the “will” — the latter being the active agent by
Wordsworth (who criticized Coleridge’s distinction means of which the former’s formative and creative
between imagination and fancy), and many others powers are focused and concentrated — were taken
must be seen as re-enactments of positions derived up and further developed in the context of the mes-
from the traditions outlined above, or as relatively merist discourse. This combination came to play a
independent new departures. Generally speaking, central role in the magical theory of > Eliphas Lévi,
scholars investigating such authors have tended to whose debt to mesmerism can scarcely be overesti-
concentrate on how they reacted to well-known mated. According to Lévi, the universe is perme-
philosophical debates and authors, notably Hume ated by an “astral light” (clearly modeled after
and Kant. While the great importance of those Mesmer’s invisible fluid, but also strongly
backgrounds is not in any doubt, the relevance of influenced by Paracelsus, to whom he often refers
pre-critical neoplatonic, paracelsian and theosoph- in this connection), and it is by means of the imag-
ical traditions has traditionally been underesti- ination coupled with the will that one can establish
mated, and requires more research. contact with this hidden dimension of reality. It
In the present context we will have to restrict was only a small step, but an important one, to see
ourselves to the role of the imagination specifically this hidden and mysterious but universally present
in esoteric and occultist contexts, but not before “astral light” not only as an invisible “life force” or
having emphasized that such a focus is mostly psycho-physical agent of mediation (similar to
inspired by pragmatic considerations and is in fact Ficino’s “spiritus”), but associate it with the actual
artifical to a considerable degree: the boundaries experiential realities to which the imagination
between Western esotericism and the fields of art gives us access, for example in visions and dreams.
and literature in the 19th and 2oth centuries are Reasoning along those lines, occultist authors
often vague and shifting (with a figure such as > came to draw the conclusion that this “world of the
William Blake, in whose personal mythology the imagination” is — like the “nightside of nature” of
imagination is personified by the entity Los and the German Romantics — superior to and, there-
associated with Christ, participating equally in all fore, somehow more “real” than the mere three-
three domains), and the frequent phenomenon of a dimensional world of the five senses. The
migration of ideas and discursive transfers occur- “disenchanted” world of the post-Kantian ratio-
ring between these various domains is of particular nalist, subject to the restrictions of time and space,
relevance and importance. is more illusionary than the world of the imagina-
The status and powers of the imagination played tion, in which those limitations no longer obtain.
an important role in the debate around mesmerism Thus the stage was set for the concept, central to all
[> Animal Magnetism / Mesmerism] investigated forms of 19th and 2oth-century occultism, of a
by a French committee in 1784. As explained by “magical plane” parallel to the every-day world.
Méheust (1999, I, 322-328, 333), the committee A central role in this regard was played by the >
members found themselves faced with a dilemma. Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, one of whose
They rejected Mesmer’s notion of an invisible most important practices focused on attaining
“fluid”, and hence found themselves incapable of “spirit vision” by means of “astral projection”.
explaining the spectacular paranormal and healing According to the Golden Dawn teachings, specific
phenomena claimed by him, other than as products occult and ritual techniques make it possible to
of “the imagination”, a term that had obviously project one’s spirit out of the “sphere of sensation”
negative connotations from their Enlightenment and into the “astral plane” of the reified imagina-
perspective; but ironically, in doing so they ended tion; and essentially the same approach has become
up attributing to the imagination powers that, a standard element of occultist magic in the 20th
from that same perspective, it was not supposed to century. As pointed out by its most profound ana-
have. They thus opened up a “pandora’s box” that lyst, Tanya Luhrmann, the concept of a “separate-

--- Page 39 ---
615 IMAGINATION
but-connected” magical plane, existing on a differ- cades, culminating in his preeminent influence on
ent level of reality parallel to the world of the James Hillman’s post-Jungian archetypal psychol-
senses, is crucial for understanding how contempo- ogy’. By such channels, the Corbinian imagination
rary magicians legitimate magic in a disenchanted entered various “counter-cultural” and even >
world. Its function ‘lies in keeping unhappy bedfel- New Age discourses in the wake of the famous
lows apart’ (Luhrmann 1989, 276) and allowing Eranos meetings; as such, it continues to influence
the magician to “live in two worlds” while avoid- popular perceptions of Western esotericism.
ing cognitive dissonance: the rules that apply in the
disenchanted world of the senses simply do not Lit.: Michael J.B. Allen, The Platonism of Marsilio
apply in the world of the imagination, and the Ficino: A Study of his “Phaedrus” Commentary, Its
reverse (cf. Hanegraaff 2003). Moreover, since Sources and Genesis, Berkeley, Los Angeles, London:
University of California Press, 1984 @ idem, Icastes:
there is no meta-level with rules that apply to both
Marsilio Ficino’s Interpretation of Plato’s “Sophist”
levels, there is no basis for denying the world of the (Five Studies and a Critical Edition with Translation),
imagination a “reality” at least equal to that of the Berkeley, Los Angeles, Oxford: University of Califor-
world of the senses. nia Press, 1989 @ idem, Plato’s Third Eye: Studies in
The imagination also plays an important role in Marsilio Ficino’s Metaphysics and Its Sources, Alder-
various other 2oth-century forms of esotericism, shot: Variorum, 1995 @ idem, Synoptic Art: Marsilio
Ficino on the History of Platonic Interpretation, Flo-but all of them seem to be individual variations on
rence: Leo S. Olschki, 1998 @ L. Ambrosi, La psicolo-
the basic approaches that emerged from the roth-
gia della Immaginazione nella storia della filosofia,
century Romantic, mesmerist and occultist contexts, Roma, 1898 @ D. Arasse, “‘Ars memoriae’ et symboles
and their “para-paracelsian” and Christian-theo- visuels: La critique de l’imagination et la fin de la
sophical backgrounds. One example is > Carl Gus- Renaissance”, Symboles de la Renaissance 9 (1976)
tav Jung’s concept of the “active imagination”, J. Barnouw, Propositional Perception, Phantasia, Pre-
which plays an important role in his psychothera- dication and Sign in Plato, Aristotle and the Stoics,
Lanham, New York, Oxford, 2002 @ Annie Becq, “Aux
peutic system. Another is > Rudolf Steiner’s system
sources occultes de l’esthétique romantique: Limagi-
for “attaining knowledge of higher worlds”, where nation selon Saint-Martin”, in: Le Préromantisme
the imagination is the lowest in a series of three (Colloque de Clermont-Ferrand), Paris: Klincksieck,
spiritual faculties (followed by inspiration and 1975 @ eadem, “Limagination créatrice et la tradition
intuition). And finally, » Henry Corbin — with pri- ésotérique”, Revue des Sciences Humaines 176 (1979),
mary reference to Islamic esotericism, especially 43-55 @ Adriana Berger, “Cultural Hermeneutics: The
Concept of Imagination in the Phenomenological Ap-Ibn ‘Arabi (Corbin 1969) — introduced a theory
proaches of Henry Corbin and Mircea Eliade”, The
that has become highly influential not only in vari-
Journal of Religion 66 (1986), 141-156 @ H.J. Blu-
ous esoteric currents, but has also left its mark on menthal, “Neoplatonic Interpretations of Aristotle on
scholars of Western esotericism of a “religionist” Phantasia”, Review of Metaphysics 31 (1977), 242-
orientation. The imagination, according to Corbin, 257 @ idem, “On Soul and Intellect”, in: L-P. Gerson
is both a means of knowledge and a modality of (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Plotinus, Cam-
being, and as such it constitutes a mundus imagi- bridge, 1996, 82-104 @ R.E. Brennan, “The Thomist
Concept of the Imagination”, The New Scholasticism
nalis, a “mesocosm” or intermediary reality be-
15 (1941), 149-161 @ M.W. Bundy, The Theory of
tween the intelligible sphere and the realm of the Imagination in Classical and Medieval Thought
senses. Corbin coined the term “imaginal” to dis- (1927), Illinois, 1970 @ M.-D. Chenu, “Imaginatio:
tinguish his concept from the merely “imaginary” Note de lexicographie philosophique médiévale”, in:
(yet another variation on Paracelsus’ and Cole- Miscellanea Giovanni Mercati, vol. 2, Citta del Vati-
ridge’s distinction between fantasy and imagina- cano 1946, 593-602 Ioan P. Couliano, Eros and
tion), but its ontological status is predictably Magic in the Renaissance, Chicago and London: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1987 @ J.M. Cocking, Imagi-
ambiguous: the imaginal is neither a place nor a
nation: A Study in the History of Ideas, London, 1991
non-place, but although Corbin insists on its “real- ¢ Henry Corbin, Creative Imagination in the Sufism of
ity”, he remains elusive in referring to it by terms Ibn ‘Arabi, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969
such as ‘le pays du non-oW’ (the land of no-where; ¢ idem, “Mundus Imaginalis, or, the Imaginary and the
see Berger 1986, 146). To what extent Corbin’s Imaginal”, Spring (1972), 1-19 Catherine Crowe,
mundus imaginalis is indebted to the currents out- The Night-Side of Nature, or, Ghosts and Ghost-Seers
(1848), repr. Wellingborough: Aquarian Press, 1986
lined above is a question that would require further
Antoine Faivre, Theosophy, Imagination, Tradition:
investigation. In any case, as formulated by Steven Studies in Western Esotericism, Albany: State Univer-
M. Wasserstrom (1999, 148), the ‘emphasis on the sity of New York Press 2000, 99-167 Heinrich Feldt,
reality of the imagination’s objects has made “The ‘Force’ of Imagination in the Medicine of Late
Corbin a favorite of theorists of poetics for de- Eighteenth Century Germany”, in: Leonie de Goei &

--- Page 40 ---
IMAGINATION 616
Joost Vijselaar (eds.), Proceedings of the rst European Greek Philosophy, Albany, 1972, 491-504 @ J.-C.
Congress on the History of Psychiatry and Mental Schmitt, “Limagination efficace”, in: K. Kriiger &
Health Care, Rotterdam: Erasmus Publishing, 1993, A. Nova (eds.), Imagination und Wirklichkeit: Zum
25-31 @ J. Freudenthal, Uber den Begriff des Wortes Verhaltnis von mentalen Bildern in der Kunst der
Phantasia bei Aristoteles, Gottingen, 1863 # Eugenio friiben Neuzeit, Mainz, 2000 @ Heinz Schott, “‘Invisible
Garin, “Phantasia” e “Imaginatio” fra Marsilio Ficino Diseases’ — Imagination and Magnetism: Paracelsus
e Pietro Pomponazzi, in: M. Fattori & M.L. Bianchi and the Consequences”, in: Ole Peter Grell (ed.), Para-
(eds.), Phantasia-Imaginatio: Atti del V Colloquio celsus: The Man and his Reputation, his Ideas and their
internazionale del Lessico Intellettuale Europeo, Transformation, Leiden, Boston, K6ln: E.J. Brill, 1998,
Roma 9-11 gennaio 1986, Roma, 1988, 3-20 (repr. in: 309-321 @ Lynn Thorndike, “Imagination and Magic”,
Garin, Umanistict, artisti, scienziati: Studi sul Rinasci- in: Mélanges Eugéne Tisserant, Citta del Vaticano,
mento italiano, Roma, 1989, 305-317) # Alain Godet, 1964 @N. Tirinnanzi, Umbra naturae: Limmaginazione
“Nun was ist die Imaginatio anderst als ein Sonn im da Ficino a Bruno, Roma, 2000 @ G. Verbeke, L’évo-
Menschen”: Studien zu einem Zentralbegriff des lution de la docrine du pneuma du stoicisme a
magischen Denkens, Zurich, 1982 # Wouter J. Hane- S. Augustin, Paris, Louvain, 1945 # D.P. Walker, Spir-
graaff, “How Magic Survived the Disenchantment of itual and Demonic Magic from Ficino to Campanella,
the World”, Religion 33:4 (2003), 357-380 @ M.H. London, 1958 ¢ id., “Medical Spirits and God and the
Huet, Monstrous Imagination, Cambridge (Ma.), Soul”, in: M. Fattori & M. Bianchi (eds.), Spiritus: Atti
1993 @ M. Kemp, “From ‘Mimesis’ to ‘Fantasia’: The del IV Colloquio Internazionale del Lessico Intellec-
Quattrocento Vocabulary of Creation, Inspiration and tuale Europeo, 7-9 gennaio 1983, Roma, 1984 ¢
Genius in the Visual Arts”, Viator: Medieval and M. Warnock, Imagination, London, 1976 @ Frances A.
Renaissance Studies 8 (1977), 347-398 # R. Klein, Yates, Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition,
“Vimagination comme vétement de’Ame chez Marsile Chicago, London, 1964 @ id., The Art of Memory,
Ficin et Giordano Bruno”, Revue de métaphysique et London, 1966 @ Paola Zambelli, “Uimmaginazione e
morale 61 (1956), 18-39 @ P.O. Kristeller, The Philos- il suo potere: Da al-Kindi, al-Farabi e Avicenna al
ophy of Marsilio Ficino, New York, 1943 # Tanya M. Medioevo latino e al Rinascimento”, in: A. Zimmer-
Luhrmann, “Persuasive Ritual: The Role of the Imagi- mann (ed.), Miscellanea Mediaevalia: Verdffentlichun-
nation in Occult Witchcraft”, Archives des Sciences gen des Thomas-Instituts der Universitat zu K6ln, Bd.
Sociales des Religions 60:1 (1985), 151-170 @ eadem, 17: Orientalische Kultur und Europdisches Mittelalter,
Persuasions of the Witch’s Craft: Ritual Magic in Berlin, New York, 1985, 188-206.
Contemporary England, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1989 @ Bertrand Méheust, Som- MARIEKE J.E. VAN DEN DOEL &
nambulisme et médiumnité, 2 vols, Le Plessis-Robin- WOUTER J. HANEGRAAFF
son: Institut Synthélabo, 1999, esp. I, 320-342 @ P.
Michaud-Quantin, “La classification des puissances de Intermediary Beings I: Antiquity
l’ame au douziéme siécle”, Revue du moyen age latin 5
(1949), 15-34 @ L. Nebes, Der Furor Poeticus im ital-
ienischen Renaissanceplatonismus: Studien zu Kom- 1. INTRODUCTION 2. DEMONS (2A. GREECE
mentar und Literaturtheorie bei Ficino, Landino und 2B. ISRAEL, JUDAISM, CHRISTIANITY)
Patrizi, Marburg, 2001 @ K. Park, The Imagination in 3. ANGELS (3A. GREECE 3B. ISRAEL,
Renaissance Psychology (unpublished), M.Phil. Diss. JUDAISM, CHRISTIANITY)
University of London, 1974 @ idem, “Pico’s De Imagi-
natione in der Geschichte der Philosophie”, in:
1. INTRODUCTION
E. Keszler (ed.), Gianfrancesco Pico della Mirandola:
The belief in angels, demons and other interme- Ueber die Vorstellung. De Imaginatione. Lateinisch-
deutsche Ausgabe, Munchen, 1984 F.N.L. Poynter diary beings has become an important aspect of
(ed.), The History and Theory of Knowledge of the Western religious thought and imagination, in
Brain and its Functions, Oxford, 1958 # Marco Pasi, mainstream Christianity as well as in esoteric cur-
“La notion de magie dans le courant occultiste en rents. Its emergence was mainly the result of the
Angleterre (1875-1947)”, unpubl. Ph.D. thesis, Paris: combination of Greek and Jewish ideas about good
Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes (Sorbonne), 2004
and evil spirits that have a direct influence on
M. Putscher, Pneuma, Spiritus, Geist: Vorstellungen
human life. Sometimes these beings are individually vom Lebensantrieb in ihren geschichtlichen Wandlun-
gen, Wiesbaden, 1973 @ Fazlur Rahman, “Dream, distinguished by name, but often they are thought
Imagination, and ‘Alam al-Mithal”, Islamic Studies 3 to operate as nameless members of a distinct group,
(1964), 167-180 @ W. Raith, Die Macht des Bildes: Ein which as a whole is named after the specific activity
humanistisches Problem bei Gianfrancesco Pico della it deploys. In a further stage of development, espe-
Mirandola, Minchen, 1967 @ B. Ransch-Trill, Phan- cially in the Jewish and Christian tradition, they
tasie: Welterkenntnis und Welterschaffung: Zur philo-
were conceived of as tightly organized, like an army,
sophischen Theorie der Einbildungskraft, Bonn, 1996
@ D.A. Rees, “Aristotle’s Treatment of Phantasia”, in: with a commander-in-chief (the archangel Michael
J.P. Anton & G.L. Kustas (eds.), Essays in Ancient or Satan) and lower commanding officers.

--- Page 41 ---
617 INTERMEDIARY BEINGS I: ANTIQUITY
Under the influence of Christianity, it has become cles, which is of great importance for our knowl-
usual in the West to distinguish the evil and good edge of ancient demonology, Plutarch (ca. A.D.
spiritual beings as “demons” and “angels” respec- 100) ascribed this decline to the gradual disappear-
tively. For that reason, some aspects of the enor- ance of the demons, who according to him were
mous corpus of material on intermediary beings long-living but not immortal. The Stoic school-
that has been assembled (in particular by Colpe head Chrysippus (3rd century B.C.) taught that the
et al. and Michl) will be discussed here under those gods punished unholy and unrighteous people
headings. Linguistically, these terms derive from through evil demons (Plutarch, Ouaestiones Rom.,
the Greek words daimon and angelos; historically, 51). According to the hermetic Asclepius, 23, 37-
the Christian angels have their origin in Judaism, 38, the statues of the gods in the temples are
whereas the demons have their roots in both the beneficent or harmful through the demons that
classical and the Jewish world. It may be useful, have been conjured into them. The demons, which
however, to emphasize that the distinction between were thought to live in the air (cf. also Ephesians
good angels and bad demons is Jewish and Christ- 6:12), played an important role in the fate of the
ian: in Antiquity, demons were thought to be both soul after death, inter alia in ~ Hermetism. The
beneficent and harmful. Asclepius, 28, knows of a chief demon in the air
Intermediary beings of quite another kind are that weighs and judges the soul’s merits and
those that are in fact individualized and personified accordingly has it punished or rewarded (cf. also
attributes of the godhead, such as the Jewish Wis- C.H. X, 21; XVI, 10-17). According to John Lydus,
dom or the gnostic aeons. They are discussed in De mensibus IV, 32 and 149, the Greek version
connection with > Gnosticism. of the Asclepius distinguished between ‘avenging
demons’ (on earth), ‘cleansing demons’ (in the air),
2. DEMONS and ‘saving demons’ (on the moon). The Neo-
platonists, Iamblichus and Proclus in particular,
2A. GREECE developed a whole system of daimones or “souls”
The Greek word daimon originally designated a between heaven and earth. They were strongly
god or, more vaguely, a divine power. From the lat- influenced by the demonology of the so-called
ter it evolved into an indication of the undeter- Chaldaean Oracles (2nd century A.D.), which,
mined superhuman power that causes the good or however, made a clear distinction between good
bad events of human life, i.e. of fate (Rata tina dai- and bad intermediary beings, by calling the former
mona = by accident). Another line of development “angels” and the latter “demons”. This was in
led to the idea that souls become demons after accordance with the increasing tendency of later
death, — a belief that persisted until the end of the Antiquity to consider the demons as evil beings,
classical period and beyond. Already Hesiod (6th which had already become an established fact in
century B.C.) says that the people of the Golden Judaism and Christianity.
Age became ‘pure demons dwelling on the
earth, .. . delivering from harm, and guardians of 2B. ISRAEL, JUDAISM, CHRISTIANITY
mortal men’ (Works and Days, 121-123). This led The development of Israel’s religion into a strict
to the idea of a personal daimon as a tutelary spirit monotheism often involved the admission of other
or genius. Every human being has his own daimon, Near Eastern gods or mythological beings into the
who is given to him at birth, or whom he chooses royal court of JHWH, as his servants. Biblical
himself, as Plato says (Republic, X, 617e). In Stoic examples are the ‘sons of God’ (Job 1:6; 2:1; 38:7)
philosophy the daimon was identified with the — though these apparently could be inclined to evil
divine part in man, his nous. Thus the emperor (Genesis 6:1-4) — and the adoption of mythological
Marcus Aurelius said of the daimon (Meditations, beings such as the cherubs (e.g. 1 Samuel 4:4; Isa-
V, 27) that ‘Zeus has given a particle of himself as iah 37:16) and the seraphs (e.g. Isaiah 6). The idea
leader and guide to everybody, i.e. his mind (ous) that each people has its own god was accepted at
and reason (logos)’. Though the belief in good and first, but was later rejected: in Psalm 82 these gods
bad sprits primarily belonged to the domain of (cf. vs. 6: ‘You are gods, ... children of the most
popular religion, the philosophers could not ignore high’) are judged and condemned to death. In the
it and, therefore, gave it a place in their reflections Septuagint (LXX), the Greek translation of the
(Zintzen, 640-668). The Stoics held that the oracles Hebrew bible, the foreign national gods, said to be
and other mantic practices were due to the activity idols in Hebrew, become demons, e.g. Psalm 95:5
of demons. In his treatise On the decline ofthe ora- (LXX): ‘All the gods of the nations are demons’. In

--- Page 42 ---
INTERMEDIARY BEINGS I: ANTIQUITY 618
the Old Testament the borderline between evil that 3. ANGELS
comes from punishing angels of God and that
which is caused by wicked spirits, is difficult to 3A. GREECE
discern. The latter were mostly conceived of as dan- The Greek word angelos means “messenger”. If
gerous animals that live in destroyed and deserted the gods wanted to send a message, they made use
places (cf. Isaiah 3 4:13ff.). A terrifying assistant of of special messengers, often birds or minor gods.
JHWH is ‘the Destroyer’, who killed the firstborn The divine messenger par excellence was Hermes,
of Egypt (Genesis 12:23) and many Israelites after who also functioned as guide of the dead to the
David’s census (then called ‘the Destroying Angel’: underworld (cf. ~ Hermes Trismegistus). In Near
2 Samuel 24:16; 1 Chronicles 21:15). A negative Eastern adaptations of the Greek gods, these are
development is usually ascribed to the character of sometimes also called angelos (Michl, 55: Zeus
Satan (though doubted by Day, 730): from a mes- Hypsistos as ‘good angelos’; Jupiter angelus). An
senger of God (Numbers 22:22-35) and the Orphic Hymn, preserved in Clement of Alexan-
unfriendly ‘Accuser’ of Job at the heavenly court, dria, Stromateis V, 125, 3 (fragm. 248 Kern),
who is nevertheless subject to God (Job 1), he grad- speaks of “angels” that surround the throne of
ually developed into the arch-enemy of God and the deity and care for human affairs. In one of the
man (first clearly visible in 1 Chronicles 21:1). “theological” oracles from Clarus, the gods
Another name for the Prince of Evil became Belial describe themselves as “angels” of the transcen-
or Beliar (originally a word meaning “wickedness”). dent Supreme God: ‘only a small part of God are
In the post-exilic period, the belief in good and we, his angels’ (preserved on a wall in the city
evil spirits increased enormously. According to the Oinoanda, in the Greek Theosophy, 13, and Lac-
Community Rule of Qumran, 3, 13-26, God has tantius, Institutiones divinae, 1, 7, 1). In the Greek
created two Spirits: the Spirit of Truth (also called magical papyri, mention is often made of angels
the Angel or Prince of Light) and the Spirit of False- and archangels, but it seems certain that this is due
hood (the Angel or Prince of Darkness), and to Jewish or Christian influence. As a whole, the
accordingly there are two classes of beings: the idea of angelic beings, serving at the heavenly court
Sons of Light and the Sons of Darkness. In another as servants and messengers of the gods, is not
famous Qumran writing, the War of the Sons of Greek but of Near Eastern origin.
Light against the Sons of Darkness, the latter are In > Neoplatonism, the term “angels” was used
also called ‘the Army of Belial’. Whereas in the Old for the various levels of being between heaven and
Testament the evil spirits are mostly nameless or earth, and as such it became equivalent to
identified with dangerous animals, the later devel- “demons” and “souls” (as a result, one could speak
opment shows a tendency to distinguish individual of “angelic demons”). As said above, the Chal-
demons by name (Maier, 679-687: a list of 123 daean Oracles distinguished between good angels
demons in the Talmud). It was in Jewish popular and bad demons, and accordingly Porphyry taught
religion in particular that the belief in all kinds of that the air was filled with bad demons, whereas
spirits assumed enormous proportions, which ex- the ether was the dwelling-place of the angels (>
plains the occurrence of so many Jewish names in Augustine, City of God, X, 9). It is difficult to deter-
Greek magical texts. mine to what extent these views have been in-
The Christians adopted and combined the vari- fluenced by Jewish and Christian traditions. This
ous forms of Hellenistic and Jewish demonology. seems, however, almost certainly the case when
The Gospels show Jesus in continuous confronta- these angels are presented as whole divisions com-
tion with evil spirits, ejecting them from the pos- manded by “archangels”, who in their turn are
sessed and forbidding them to reveal his identity under the supreme command of the gods (Michl,
(e.g. Mark 1:32-34). The apostle Paul shared the 58f.).
Jewish idea that the pagan gods are actually
demons (1 Corinthians 10:20). In this view, which 3B. ISRAEL, JUDAISM, CHRISTIANITY
became generally accepted in the early Church, the The Hebrew word mal?ak is used to designate
gods of the Graeco-Roman world were not neu- both a human and a divine messenger. The term
tralized, but remained frightening supernatural primarily indicates a function, not a heavenly being
beings, whose evil activities had to be averted. The of a specific nature. In the Old Testament, the term
idea that demons could be beneficent was aban- mal’ak JHWH can be applied to a prophet (e.g.
doned: exorcism became a common Christian Haggai 1:13; Malachi 2:7), but mostly it indicates
practice and the abjuration of the devil became part a messenger from God, “an angel (or: the Angel) of
of the ritual of baptism. the Lord”. If written with the definite article, the

--- Page 43 ---
619 INTERMEDIARY BEINGS IJ: MIDDLE AGES
Angel of the Lord is mostly a manifestation of East, the cult of angels and speculations about their
JHWH himself, probably introduced to have God nature and influences on human life flourished
less directly involved in human affairs. enormously, not only among ordinary people, but
Only in the later texts of the Old Testament and also among theologians (cf. the catalogue of 269
in Judaism and Christianity the words mal’ak and angels in Michl, 200-239). A typically Christian
angelos became generic terms for the heavenly ser- innovation is the assumption of nine angelic choirs,
vants of God. Then also the cherubs and seraphs which is first attested in the 4th century (Michl,
could be indicated as “angels”, though they had 171-174). > Pseudo-Dionysius Areopagita (ca.
never been conceived of as divine messengers. In 500) divided the nine choirs into three groups in
early Judaism and Christianity the angels played an ascending order: 1. Angels, Archangels, Principali-
increasingly important role in the religious imagi- ties, 2. Powers, Dominions, Forces, 3. Thrones,
nation and experience of believers, as is abundantly Cherubs, Seraphs. This angelology became gener-
testified by the Old Testament Apocrypha and ally accepted, not only in the East, but also in the
Pseudepigrapha and, for instance, the Revelation West, especially after - Scottus Eriugena’s trans-
of John in the New Testament. Then it also became lation of the Areopagite’s works.
possible to speak of the powers of evil as “Angels
of Darkness”. The Old Testament expression Lit.: F. Andres, “Daimon”, Pauly-Wissowa, Realency-
clopaedie der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft,“Lord of Hosts” led to the idea of separate classes
Supplement Band III (1918), 267-322 @ C. Breitenbach
of angels, which were commanded by the seven
& P.L. Day, “Satan”, DDD (see below), 726-732 @
Archangels. The first text to refer to them, 1 Enoch, C. Colpe, J. Maier, C. Zintzen et alii, “Geister (Damo-
20:1 and 7, mentions Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, nen)”, RAC 9 (1976), 546-761 # M. Detienne, La
Uriel, Raguel, Sariel, and Remiel. Other groups, notion de DAIMON dans le Pythagoréisme ancien
often mentioned together in Jewish and Christian (Bibliothéque de la Faculté de Philosophie et Lettres de
writings, are “Thrones”, “Sovereignties”, “Au- l'Université de Liége, CLXV), Paris: Les Belles Lettres,
1963 @ W. Foerster, “Daimon”, Theologisches Worter-
thorities”, “Powers”, etc. (e.g. Colossians 1:16;
buch zum Neuen Testament, II (1935), 1-21 @ J. Michl
1 Corinthians 15:5; Michl, 79-80, 112-114). and Th. Klauser, “Engel”, RAC 5 (1962), 53-322 @
The angels were thought to fulfil all kinds of S.B. Parker, “Sons of (the) God(s)”, DDD, 794-800 @
duties with respect to the world and man. A special K. van der Toorn, B. Becking and P.W. van der Horst
type of angels, which has to be mentioned here (eds.), Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible
because of the great importance attached to it in (DDD), second, extensively revised edition, Leiden:
Brill, 1999 @ J. Riley, “Demon”, DDD, 235-240 @Western Christendom, is that of the guardian
idem, “Devil”, DDD, 244-249.
angel. Just as all peoples have their own special
angels, likewise each individual has his personal ROELOF VAN DEN BROEK
angel. This view seems influenced by the Pytha-
gorean interpretation of the Greek idea of the per-
sonal daimon, discussed above. The Pythagoreans Intermediary Beings II: Middle Ages
connected it with that of the eiddlon, the recogniz-
able unsubstantial shape of the deceased in the 1. INTERMEDIARY BEINGS WITH A CLEAR
underworld, and identified this entity with the pre- RELATION TO LITURGICAL SOURCES
existent soul. In the Jewish world this led to the 2. INTERMEDIARY BEINGS WITH
idea that the guardian angel lives in heaven and BACKGROUNDS IN SOURCES OUTSIDE
resembles the person he is assigned to. In the Tal- THE LITURGY
mud, the guardian angel is indicated by the Greek
loan word igonin, i.e. “image” (Deut. Rabba 4, Intermediary beings are not separable from their
2o1d). In Matthew 18:10, Jesus says of the little modes of relation to living people, nor from the
children that ‘they have their (guardian) angels in narratives and ritual processes through which these
heaven, who look continually on the face of my relations are enacted and interpreted. In the me-
heavenly Father’, and in Acts 12:15, the disciples, dieval context, the Catholic, institutional and
who cannot believe that Peter is knocking on the acceptable forms of ritual process through which
door, assume: ‘It must be his angel’. This idea of a these relations often took place (such as the exor-
heavenly counterpart of each individual was still cism of demons, the conjuring of ghosts, the litur-
held in the 3rd-century Jewish-Christian commu- gical invocations of angels and saints in litanies for
nity in Mesopotamia in which > Mani grew up: he specific occasions) must be borne in mind when
twice received an appearance of his heavenly twin. considering more private, extra-institutional ritual
In the Christian Church, especially that of the processes (such as the invocations of angels

--- Page 44 ---
INTERMEDIARY BEINGS II: MIDDLE AGES 620
described in texts like the Ars notoria or the com- visionum offers a ritual system for procuring
manding of demons in necromantic experiments). visions of the Virgin Mary and angels, and attain-
These extra-institutional practices often derived ing knowledge via angelic mediation, understood
from liturgical rituals or had a conscious relation to as divine knowledge, but encapsulated in the form
them, as too, in other ways, did the spontaneous of the seven liberal arts. John, a visionary himself,
visitations of such beings (also extra-institutional claimed to have received the prayer system from
in principle) recounted by visionaries like Margery the Virgin Mary, and believed that it induced gen-
Kempe or Joan of Arc. uine communication with angels and the Virgin in
In the later middle ages, new strands of interme- the form of true and divine visions. Though his
diary beings begin to become visible with greater claims were not believed by everybody (the text
frequency in the cosmological tapestry. In some was burnt as heretical at the University of Paris in
texts, hierarchies of named and categorized demons 1323), there was little in John’s system that was not
appear; planetary angels and more ambiguous enti- inspired by, or in some cases directly drawn from,
ties begin to be described, deriving in some cases the prayers and divine offices John would have
from Old Testament apocrypha or from newly cir- heard and used in daily worship. Within John’s sys-
culating Hebrew sources, in other cases from trans- tem, after a set of preliminary prayers designed to
lations or adaptations from Arabic works. While obtain communication with the Virgin Mary, each
the origins of particular named angels or demons of the nine orders of angels is invoked (with careful
are not always clear, all angelic beings with strange attention to the heavenly hierarchies and corre-
names (i.e., names apart from the standard set of spondences of beings within each hierarchy), to
archangels, Michael, Gabriel and, though apoc- deliver each of the seven liberal arts, philosophy
ryphal, Raphael and sometimes Uriel), stand out as and theology. In several instances certain liberal
foreign against the more limited set of beings it was arts are also associated with certain of the holy and
normal to invoke in Catholic liturgy. Strange angels elect souls of the dead dwelling with the angels
tended to be regarded as potentially suspect, not in the same hierarchy; for example at the level of
necessarily benign whatever they might claim to Rhetoric (Thrones), the Patriarchs, Prophets,
the contrary, since it was well known that a demon Apostles and Evangelists are also called upon; at
could appear in the guise of an angel of light. the level of Astronomy (Principalities), the Mar-
It must be emphasised, however, that the charac- tyrs, Confessors, Holy Widows, Monks and Her-
ter of any intermediary being is likely to become mits, and at the level of Theology (Seraphim), the
ambiguous as soon as it manifests as an apparition Virgin Martyrs.
to a living person. Whether an individual appari- This list of angels, saints and martyrs works
tion should be understood as benign or malign was nicely as a synopsis of those heavenly beings whose
a matter that depended on the context of the intercessory powers were commonly invoked in
apparition and the judgment of the individuals liturgical contexts. The litany of saints invokes a
involved. Thus, while there was more than one substantially similar set of beings, as also, in some-
stock of names to conjure by at the end of the mid- what abbreviated form, does the litany in the rite
dle ages, and while these stocks of beings are to for commending a departing soul to God: ‘Holy
some extent distinguishable, nevertheless these Mary, pray for him (her). All ye holy angels and
categories (Catholic, non-Catholic; institutional, archangels, pray, etc. Holy Abel, All ye choirs of
extra-institutional) are fluid and permeable ones. the just, Holy Abraham, St. John the Baptist, St.
For this reason it is not really possible to treat the Joseph, All holy patriarchs and prophets, St. Peter,
types of intermediary beings invoked or conjured St. Paul, St. Andrew, St. John, All ye holy apostles
in more orthodox and public contexts separately and evangelists, All ye holy disciples of our Lord,
from those invoked or conjured in the more private All ye holy Innocents, St. Stephen, St. Lawrence,
contexts situated most clearly in the history of eso- All ye holy martyrs, St. Sylvester, St. Gregory, St.
teric thought. Augustine, All ye holy bishops and confessors, St.
Benedict, St. Francis, St. Camillus, St. John of God,
1. INTERMEDIARY BEINGS WITH A St. Mary Magdalen, St. Lucy, All ye holy monks
CLEAR RELATION TO LITURGICAL and hermits, All ye holy virgins and widows, All
SOURCES ye holy men and women, saints of God, make
The Liber visionum of John of Morigny (fl. intercession for him (her)’ (Roman Ritual, vol. I,
1304-1318) offers a case in point of individual and 407-409).
institutional judgements at variance. The Liber John’s prayer system was designed to enable the

--- Page 45 ---
621 INTERMEDIARY BEINGS II: MIDDLE AGES
Operator to engage in visionary communication behaviour. It is interesting that the instructions for
with the divine beings whose alliance with the performing an exorcism in the Roman Ritual (a
Christian world had long been institutionalized; 16th-century compilation of earlier materials) pre-
but the fact that no strange angels were summoned serve the admonition that the exorcist should not
did not put such interactions above suspicion — digress into chat (multiloquio) with the demon, nor
something which Joan of Arc was also to learn to ask it curious questions about hidden or future
her cost some hundred years later. There could be things (Roman Ritual, vol. Il, 171-173). It seems
no common consensus about the nature of these likely that the temptation to interrogate the demon
saints and angels because, though not unorthodox, about matters not pertinent to the exorcism was
they were also not theoretical; because they ap- always strong, and, to judge from these warnings,
peared to real people who claimed to have spoken not always successfully resisted.
with them, they raised difficult questions which In the later Middle Ages there are also recorded
could not be answered by the simple application of accounts of ghosts of the ordinary dead appearing
theoretical categories of licit and illicit spirits. What to people they had known in life. Perhaps the most
could be questioned was the individual’s mode of widely circulated account of such an interaction
communication with these presences: where the describes the ghost of Gui of Corvo who began to
prayers used to summon spirits were novel and manifest in the form of a disembodied voice to his
extra institutional, the spirits themselves could not terrified widow immediately after his death on the
(or not always) be seen to be above suspicion. sixteenth of December, probably in 1323. A report
If celestial beings such as angels, the Virgin, and was written up and submitted to Pope John XXII
the souls of the elect could be communicated with by Jean Gobi, prior of the Dominicans of Alés, who
both in ways that were institutionally sanctioned had been called in by the widow and her friends to
and ways that were not, the same is true for other deal with the apparition. Concealing a consecrated
beings, such as demons and the ghosts of the ordi- host on his person to ascertain the non-demonic
nary dead. The similarity between necromantic character of the spirit, the prior entered the
formulae of conjuration and exorcistic practices by widow’s house and conjured the ghost to remain
which both demons and ghosts might be com- and speak with him. After he established that the
manded has already been noted. There was simi- spirit was a good spirit who had been obliged to
larity too in the ways that information passed perform a portion of his purgatory on earth, the
between demons and living persons through both prior’s questions became more general: how does
licit and illicit modes of exorcism. In compilations the ghost speak without a mouth or tongue? By
of necromantic experiments, demons might be what works can one best ensure entry into heaven?
called upon for a variety of purposes, but very com- What are the worst punishments of purgatory? Do
monly they were summoned because the conjuror demons cluster about dying souls? In every case the
wished to derive information about something hid- ghost answered as best it could, or deferred its
den, such as the location of stolen goods or buried silence to the will of God.
treasure, or the outcome of some personal matter Certain ambiguities about this case may be
which was in doubt. While practitioners of legiti- remarked, for in some ways the ghost is handled
mate exorcism might not in principle seek to much like a demon; ritual precautions are taken in
accomplish divination by demons, nevertheless the its vicinity to protect observers, and the spirit is
ritual of exorcising a possessed person would be conjured, just as demons are conjured, to remain
likely to involve repeated attempts to cast out the until dismissed, and to answer questions truthfully.
demon and some experimentation with formulae Clearly it is perceived as a spirit of a kind which it
to see how the demon responded, so that even is legitimate and even necessary to command. But
where the exorcism did not involve questioning of the ghost’s apparition is also understood to be a
the demon (as it sometimes might) there would be miraculous event, and since the spirit is not malign
a flow of information in both directions between it is also seen to be legitimate and even necessary
demon and exorcist. To exorcise a demon from a for the prior to extract information from it. For-
possessed person was not thus a simple ritual act of mally, Jean Gobi’s handling of the ghost very much
command (as were the standard exorcisms per- resembles what the necromancer does (and what
formed during the consecration of holy water, salt, the exorcist is enjoined not to do): he commands a
or other liturgical objects, where demons were not spirit to reveal information about hidden and
really expected to respond) but to some extent also future things. The difference (if there is one) is
always an act of interpretation of the demon’s that the spirit is understood to be neither infernal

--- Page 46 ---
INTERMEDIARY BEINGS II: MIDDLE AGES 622
nor celestial, but something at this point still in as having various numbers of legions under them:
between. ‘Barbarus is a great Count and Duke... He can
open treasure stores not guarded by magic or
2. INTERMEDIARY BEINGS WITH incantations, and he is from the order of Virtues,
BACKGROUNDS IN SOURCES and has under him thirty-six legions’ (Kieckhefer,
OUTSIDE THE LITURGY 291). Barbarus is described as being from the
If we look more closely at the necromantic exper- angelic order of Virtues, and other spirits in the list
iments, however, this difference is smaller than it are also named with reference to their rank in the
may at first appear, since although the entities con- nine orders (Virtues, Thrones, Powers etc). Though
jured are in some cases explicitly infernal, this is not some of the spirits are described as having a fright-
always true. In the case of one necromantic experi- ening demeanor, others sound quite benevolent,
ment for conjuring a flying ship, for example, it is and there is no special effort made by the compiler
said that you do not have to worry about the nam- to clarify whether these spirits still inhabited the
ing of holy things in the conjured vehicle since the angelic orders referred to or were supposed to be
spirits responsible for the action are ‘between good fallen angels.
and evil, not dwelling in hell nor yet in paradise’ In the “Manual of Astral Magic” compiled in the
(Kieckhefer, 219; more typically the rider in such same book (Kieckhefer, 296ff.), seven angels with
vehicles is cautioned not to make the sign of the names of obvious Hebrew morphology (Raphael,
cross on account of the risk that, with the demons Gabriel, Michael, Anael, Satquiel, Samael and
being driven away, the vehicle will vanish in mid- Casziel or Captiel or Caffiel) are aligned with the
air). In other cases, due to the many strands of cul- seven planets, with various legions of sub-spirits
tural influences on such texts, it seems as though the being under the control of each. These seven angels
spirits conjured simply haven’t made up their minds in the same alignments with the planetary spheres
what categories they belong to — whether they come are witnessed with small variations in other texts,
from heaven or hell, or somewhere in between. including the medieval Liber Juratus and, later on,
More important, perhaps, than the spirits’ loca- in the works of > Agrippa, > Trithemius, and oth-
tion when they are at home is the idea of the spiri- ers following them. The Liber Juratus is explicit
tual hierarchy and earthly correspondences through that these planetary angels belong to a median cat-
which these otherworldly entities may be con- egory of spirits. The celestial angels are described
trolled by human beings. The notion that higher as being of two kinds ‘those who serve God only
spirits have lower spirits in their power tends to be and those who serve God, but will also answer to
a constant in many genres of texts, whether or not man’ (Mathiesen, 151); the former are the familiar
the entities are explicitly described as infernal. In nine orders of angels, the latter are the angels of the
some cases of necromantic conjurations, a cosmo- planetary spheres.
logical structure in which specific angels are in In the Book of the Essence of the Spirits (an
command of specific demons is implied by the man- anonymous 12th-century work derived from an
ner of the command, as in the Book of the Images Arabic source), which also describes spiritual
of the Planets, where each experiment tells the beings inhabiting the planetary spheres, a cosmo-
name of the angels who command the demons, the logical approach explicates the hierarchy of spirits
leading demon (who will perform the requested in a similar manner and in a way which makes the
action), and the names of his minions: ‘the angels cosmology specific to magical operations. The
who command it to be done are thus — Saliciel, highest group, the spirits closest to God, are incor-
Ycaachel, Harmanel — and the name of the king of ruptible and unbiddable; the spirits ruling each of
demons who commands is the Red Fighter, and his the spheres of the planets, including Urania, may be
three servants are these: Karmal, Yobial, Yfasue’ subject to human invocation and entreaty. Beneath
(Lidaka, 51). Here there seems to be a clear dis- each of the planetary rulers is a host of more passi-
tinction between the commanding angels and the ble spirits who interact with mankind at the bid-
demons who are commanded, but this is not ding of the planetary rulers. These spirits can be
always the case. persuaded or compelled to enter matter, drawn
In another medieval list of spirits (a portion of down by the symmetry and harmony of the matter
the same list found later in Weyer’s Pseudomonar- and spirit as well as by conjurations, in the same
chia Daemonum and the Goetia portion of the manner as the Hebrew planetary angels. The name
early modern compilation of magic texts known as “angels” is not used in the Book of the Essence of
the Lemegeton), a variety of spirits are named, the Spirits, but it may be noted that the picture
attributed certain ranks and powers, and described drawn here is not that of astral spirits as “forces”

--- Page 47 ---
623 INTERMEDIARY BEINGS III: RENAISSANCE
but, as with the Hebrew planetary angels, con- 1. INTRODUCTION
scious entities which can be compelled or entreated Intermediary beings retain a considerable impor-
and imprisoned in material objects, more in the tance during the Renaissance era. As in medieval
manner of the god-making passages in the Her- times, they pertain to different categories, yet share
metic Asclepius than the resonant astral forces several common features. Their perception is framed
of Al-Kindi’s de Radiis (or other texts of Arabic within a cultural context which, as remarked long
image magic). ago by Alexandre Koyré and Lucien Febvre, in
While this discussion of the spirits or angels of principle considers nothing as impossible, on
the planetary spheres seems to bring us some dis- account of the unlimited (and divinely sanctioned)
tance from the orthodox Catholic saints and angels generative faculty attributed to nature; since it is
we started with, it should be noted that schemas possible for any kind of being (intermediary or
with spirits ascending and descending through the otherwise) to exist, it may also manifest itself at
planetary spheres also appeared in philosophical will, regardless of circumstances. Correlatively, the
and literary contexts whose orthodoxy was never notion of “supernatural” is invalidated as well by
questioned, such as > Bernard Silvester’s Cosmo- this all-pervasive conception of nature, and by its
graphia in the 12th century and > Dante’s Divine overwhelming creativity: as a result, any being may
Comedy in the fourteenth. Then as now, the be seen as “natural”, belonging to one or another
difficult questions about intermediary beings order of an organic universe. Prevalent in humanis-
tended to concern their actual apparition to and tic natural philosophy and theology, a multi-layered
practical manipulation by human beings, not their cosmology adapted from the Greeks extended its
theoretical hierarchies or attributes. reach from the sublunar world to the celestial one,
and upwards to the “intelligible” realm itself, next
Jean Gobi, Dialogue avec un Fantome, Paris: Les Belles to the divine sphere, thus including the realm of
Lettres, 1994 @ The Roman Ritual (Rev. Philip T. Weller,
the aristotelian “separate substances” which the
ed.), Milwaukee: Bruce Publishing Company, 1950.
Jewish, Christian and Muslim scholastics turned
Lit.: Jean-Patrice Baudet, Henri Bresc & Benoit Grévin into “angels”. The unicity of such a continuous
(eds.), “Les anges et la magie au Moyen Age”, in: hierarchy of natural planes (outlined, for instance,
Mélanges de l’Ecole Francaise de Rome: Moyen Age in > Giovanni Pico della Mirandola’s Commento,
114:2 (2002), 589-890 @ Adolf Franz, Die kirchlichen Oratio, and Heptaplus, or in > Ficino’s Platonic
Benediktionen im Mittelalter, vol. 2, Freiburg im Theology) put emphasis on the ontological famil-
Breisgau: Verlags Herder, 1909, esp. section 14, “Bei
iarity or kinship between all living components of
Besessenheit” # Richard Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites:
this universe, from the angels on down. Analogi- A Necromancer’s Manual of the Fifteenth Century,
Stroud, Gloucestershire: Sutton Publishing, 1997 ¢ cally, man himself is perceived as “triple” in struc-
Juris Lidaka, “The Book of Angels, Rings, Characters ture, that is endowed with a corporeal, animated
and Images of the Planets attributed to Osbern Boken- (“ensouled”) and rational nature, parallel to the
ham”, in: C. Fanger (ed.), Conjuring Spirits: Texts and material, astral and angelic spheres of the macro-
Traditions of Medieval Ritual Magic, Stroud, Glouces- cosmos. From a slightly different perspective, neo-
tershire: Sutton Publishing, 1998, 32-75 Robert
platonic in origin, embodiment was considered
Mathiesen, “A Thirteenth-Century Ritual to attain the
specific to man, passions to the demons, and intel- Beatific Vision from the Sworn Book of Honorius of
Thebes”, in: Fanger, Conjuring Spirits, 143-162 lectuality was correlated with the supposedly con-
Sophie Page, Magic at St. Augustine’s, Canterbury in templative angels. Such a psychocosmia prevents a
the Middle Ages, Dissertation, Warburg Institute, 2000 perception of clear boundaries between the mate-
Jean-Claude Schmitt, Ghosts in the Middle Ages: rial and the spiritual and, insofar as it is not
The Living and the Dead in Medieval Society, Chicago: restricted to learned circles, is in accordance with a
University of Chicago Press, 1998.
general worldview literally swarming with imma-
CLAIRE FANGER terial creatures of all sorts: it is familiar to and
shared by many people in the period under discus-
sion, as shown for example by Ronsard’s Hymne
Intermediary Beings III: Renaissance des Daimons or some works of > Paracelsus. That
man should appear to almost constantly find him-
1. INTRODUCTION 2. INDIVIDUAL self in the proximinity of such entities comes as no
ANGELS& HIERARCHIES 3. ANGELS surprise since they are “intermediaries” in more
OF THE TEXT 4. THE SEVEN DIVINE ways than one, being also — mainly, even — consid-
SPIRITS 5. EvIL SPIRITS 6. ELEMENTALS ered as messengers, transmitters of knowledge
AND DISINCARNATED ENTITIES and/or of portents, at the service of humanity or
7. CONCLUSION

--- Page 48 ---
INTERMEDIARY BEINGS III: RENAISSANCE 624
ready to trap and deceive it, on errand from God or lating the seven heavens to which the parts of the
the devil. book are respectively devoted - in its most
extended versions at least — are attributed diverse
2. INDIVIDUAL ANGELS & functions for the most part in strict relation with
HIERARCHIES the nature of the firmament they belong to, and
If, judging for instance from > Trithemius’ lists invoked by name to perform all sorts of wonders,
featured in his Antipalus (pub. 1605), it would of natural, divinatory and otherwise. A wide variety
course be impossible (and quite pointless) to of “astrological” angels or spirits is also involved in
attempt to name them all, two angelic beings of pri- the Picatrix and in the rituals of ars notoria, and
mary importance make a breakthrough in early regarded as important enough to sometimes be rep-
modern esoteric literature, under the obvious resented in the magical diagrams pertaining to
influence of Jewish kabbalah [> Jewish Influences]: these practices.
Metatron and Raziel. The necessity of equating the more “esoteric”
Already found in the earlier documents of Jewish angelic hierarchies, usually borrowed from hebraic
> gnosticism, and often referred to as the Sar ha- writings, with the dionysian ones of official theol-
Panim (Prince of the Countenance), that is “head ogy, combined with the requirements of correlative
of the angels who stand before the divine Face”, symbolism, led to the appropriation, by several
Metatron nevertheless possesses an ambiguous sta- Christian kabbalists, of the order of Ishim as the
tus. Sometimes identified with Enoch (Gen. 5:21- lowest rank of angels and, given its name (derived
24), or with the angel who spoke to Moses on from ish, man), the closest to humanity. It was
several occasions (Exod. 23: 21), he is occasion- sometimes simply considered as the ninth one (in
nally (even in Jewish sources) considered almost obviously deliberate accordance with the global
identical with the Godhead, as the “lesser Adonai” number retained by > Pseudo-Dionysius Areo-
(in accordance with his name being written with or pagita), as Pico wrote for instance in his 900 The-
without a iod). Present in the works of most impor- ses (Concl. Kab. [1st s.], 2), sometimes explicitly as
tant Christian kabbalists (Pico, - Reuchlin, > a tenth one (Reuchlin, Giorgio, ~ Agrippa, Rici,
Giorgio, Rici, > Postel, > Knorr von Rosenroth), Postel), in order to establish a direct correspon-
where he is frequently equated with the Active dence between these hierarchies and the ten sefirot
Intellect of medieval sholastics, he appears in his (divine attributes), interpreted in turn as the funda-
traditional role of guide into the divine presence, mental symbolic archetype of the structure of
being simultaneously perceived as the penultimate macrocosmic or microcosmic man.
rung of the cosmological ladder, and the uppermost The macranthropos, assuming cosmic dimen-
spiritual intermediary in the contemplative ascent sions and familiar to both the platonic and Jewish
of the soul. In a way, albeit definitely an angelic traditions, is also frequently considered as a partic-
being in most respects, he is perhaps even more rep- ular angelic being, constituting the perfect “spiri-
resentative of an exalted function (but a dual one, tual form” of individual man. Conjunction or unio
both cognitive and ontological) than of a singular with him is considered a very high — if not the high-
entity, as stated by Giorgio (De harmonia mundi, est — contemplative attainment, and his kinship
I, 5, VI). with the Active Intellect and Metatron is therefore
Raziel is scarcely less important, but much more underlined (Rici, Postel). Great, and probably not
magically connotated [~ Magic]; indeed, along always resisted, must have been the temptation to
with the Picatrix, the Sefer ha Razim (or, more usu- acclimatize such speculations with those of the
ally, Sefer Raziel) is one of the most widespread and Picatrix (Ill, VI, 5) regarding the possible manifes-
appreciated magical textbooks in the Renaissance tation of the “universal intellect”, more or less
and many authors, Jewish as well as Christian (Pos- identical to one’s “perfect nature” in angelic guise,
tel, in particular), took for granted the title of the thanks however to an invocation and to joint prac-
book which mentioned the angel as Adam’s teacher tical operations seemingly pertaining to astral and
in paradise (or Noah’s, after the Flood). Thus, if talismanic magic. Under clear arabic influences,
somewhat differently from Metatron, Raziel also one might well be confronted here with a peculiar
serves as spiritual instructor while belonging to the mix of astral and angelic magic that merges the
higher angelic ranks, with a status that fluctuates in contemplative and ritual attitudes.
accordance with the various documents in which A final ambiguity must be briefly signaled here:
he is featured, and with the actual contents of the that which exists between such a supernal entity
many differing versions of the magical compilation and the angelic shape or “garment” which Christ
which bears his name. The numerous angels popu- himself is sometimes supposed to assume, the more

--- Page 49 ---
625 INTERMEDIARY BEINGS III: RENAISSANCE
so since some sort of unio mystica (contemplative esoteric and traditional Christian perspectives on
or otherwise) is sought with both, as already noted angelology, the biblical passages (Tb. 12:15; Rev.
in the case of Metatron. 4:5) pointing to the existence of a septenary of
archangels or divine spirits (although three names
3. ANGELS OF THE TEXT only are actually mentioned in Scripture, those of
Angelic names are sometimes envisaged, in kab- Gabriel, Michael and Raphael) who are always in
balistic thought, as actual components of “secret” God’s presence and are prime ministers of his will,
divine names, and extracted by mystical hermeneu- have no doubt inspired Trithemius’ De septem
tics from the biblical text itself. Such views have secundeis (1508). In this famous booklet, seven
been directly adopted by certain Christian writers, angelic rulers with classic hebrew names are each
such as Giustiniani, > Galatino or Reuchlin (De assigned regency over one planetary sphere, deter-
arte, III), who mention the scriptural verses in ques- mining a recurrent sevenfold cycle in history
tion and the manner of extracting from them sev- according to which social and spiritual transfor-
enty-two three-letter angelic names, all ultimately mations intervene. Hebraic sources (such as —
depending on the Tetragrammaton and making up hypothetically — the Pirke R. Eliezer and Sefer ha
the “great name” of seventy-two names; Reuchlin Temunah) may also have inspired the elaboration
insists particularly on the essential role played by of this influential little tract, the actual contents of
these “textual” angelic entities in both cosmologi- which resemble a concise exposé of astrological
cal and contemplative issues, a topic still taken up cyclology, where the “Intelligences” of the title are
by > Athanasius Kircher around 1650, and which classically assigned, as secondary causes, to the
later degenerated in almost unrecognizable magical movement of the planets. Whole sub-hierarchies of
recipes. angelic beings, multiplied mainly according to
Albeit in a very different manner, the Bible also astrological symbolism, were subordinated by later
represents the basic source and model for John writers (Giorgio, Kircher) to the seven “chiefs”.
Dee’s (1527-1609) angelic magic. The use of his A more or less identical list of seven angels found
famous shewstone (“magic mirror”) is explicitly its way (independently from Trithemius) into con-
inspired by the scriptural example of the High temporary Catholic worship and liturgy, as the
Priest’s breast-plate, and the presence of the bibli- official cult of the seven divine spirits. Stemming
cal archangels (see below) is frequently recorded in first from the private revelations granted to the
his magical diaries. Apart from a few cases of Blessed Amadeus (Joao da Silva e Menezes, 143 1-
angels with a feminine outward appearance (which 1482), and later from the efforts of a sicilian priest,
puzzled him very much at the outset!), Dee’s angels A. Lo Duca (1491-1564), the “recovery” of the
generally conform to their classic, ps-dionysian names and specific iconography of all seven angels
role as cosmological intermediaries, spiritual tutors of the Presence led to the renewal of their worship
and divine messengers; this is unsurprising enough and to the erection of several sanctuaries dedicated
since our man goes out of his way to try and pre- to them, most notably that of Santa Maria degli
vent dealing with possibly dubious spirits. Prayer Angeli alle Terme in Rome, completed by
and scrying are the two cornerstones of Dee’s Michelangelo in 1561. A proper religious office
method of communicating with angelic entities, an was even composed to honor the seven archangels,
activity which he understands as a notable part of duly sanctioned by the Papacy and published by Lo
natural philosophy, and as the most efficient way to Duca in Venice in 1543 (15947). The cult of these
attain both natural and divine knowledge. Essen- seven spirits enjoyed great favour well into the 17th
tial to such conversations is the recovery of the pri- century, and particularly in viceregal Spain, where
mordial, “divine” or angelic language that was they were frequently and richly depicted.
Adam’s prerogative before the Fall, and the privi- In line with these events and the spirit of the
leged expression — insofar as it is accessible to Counter Reformation is of course the 16th-17th
humans — of this superior understanding of God century spread of the devotion to the “holy guar-
and nature which Dee was so actively seeking. Seen dian angel”, officially sanctioned by the Catholic
from this perspective, such an intricacy of speech, Church in 1608, and which enjoyed even more
angelic magic and nature reminds us of certain kab- durable existence. By establishing and recommend-
balistic speculations. ing the devotion to spiritual entities such as these,
the Roman See nourished the obvious intention
4. THE SEVEN DIVINE SPIRITS (among others) of recuperating the theme of an-
Aside from these “hidden” angels of the Book, gelic intermediaries, linking them to the renewal of
and following up on the harmonization of Jewish theological speculations about the purgatory and

--- Page 50 ---
INTERMEDIARY BEINGS III: RENAISSANCE 626
the communio sanctorum, and integrating them sistency of the available vocabulary only serves to
within the new outlook on ethics and ecclesiology. make it even more difficult to pin down the exact
Finally, even though spiritual intermediaries as nature (“good” or “bad”) of the beings involved,
such, and angel-worship in particular, were never as well as the hierarchy they purportedly belong to.
well received in protestant environments, the Naturally, demons may also appear spontaneously,
famous theme of the seven divine forms or spirits in mainly the aerial ones (lower angelic beings, being
+ Jacob Boehme’s theogony enjoyed favour in immaterial, were considered to have the nature
some later pietistic and/or theosophically-inclined of air); they did so sometimes in their own guise,
circles, not all of them protestant. During the 16th or through meteorologic phenomena they were
and 17th centuries, angelic beings were sometimes believed to provoke at will, either as pranks or as
entreated in a specific current of “theosophical means to deceive or terrify humanity. Needless to
medicine”, the most well-known manifesto of which add, the actual manifestation of the Devil himself
is A. von Franckenberg’s (1593-1652) Raphael, was thought to be equally possible, albeit rare; he
oder Artzt-Engel (pub. 1676), with his tripartite could appear either of his own will or consciously
medicine: kabbalistic, magical and chemical. Other summoned by the appropriate rites and prayers,
authors, both catholic and protestant, such as for instance to preside over the witches’ sabbath
L. Meyssonnier (La Philosophie des anges, 1648), [> Witchcraft].
J. Pistorius Jr (1546-1608), M. Baldit (Speculum
sacro-medicum octogonum, 1666), have included 6. ELEMENTALS AND
angelic prayers and interventions in their therapeu- DESINCARNATED ENTITIES
tical methods. A last category of intermediary beings is that of
the “elemental” spirits, raised to prominence by >
5 Vile OlP TRAMs Paracelsus’ tract Liber de nymphis, sylphis, pyg-
The actual mention of evil demons as such is of meis, salamandris et de ceteris spiritibus (1530)
course unfrequent, unless it is in order to issue the but known from time immemorial in European
classic warnings and/or disclaimers about inter- folklore. They strikingly illustrate Paracelsus’s
course with them. That a whole corpus of earlier important use of “unscientific”, popular data,
magical texts devoted to their hierarchies and oper- mostly ignored by contemporary scholarship, and
ations, and discussing ritual invocations of them, his equally strong insistence on “experimental-
did continue to be available and to circulate more ism”: since the existence of such beings is attested
or less openly during the Renaissance, is neverthe- by daily experience, reflection must therefore take
less not in any doubt. Even though it is necessarily them into account. One may note, by the way, how
rare for authors to admit explicitly to a positive much the common religious practice of exorcisms
interest in them, there is absolutely no reason to (that of water or salt during the ceremony of bap-
imagine that such had declined, or that the relevant tism, for example, or of a house or a site to be built
literature had suddenly and unexpectedly become upon) contributed to confirm people in such
unavailable. The well-known example of > Gior- beliefs. Elemental spirits (nymphs, elves, gnomes
dano Bruno, approvingly quoting in his De and salamanders) were believed to live each in one
monade (1591) several passages from Cecco of the four elements (water, air, earth, and fire
d’Ascoli (?1269-1327)’s necromantic commentary respectively) and consequently share its nature.
on J. of Holywood’s De sphera, would suffice to Their existence is explained by the fact that the
indicate that some purpose was still attached to material elements, for Paracelsus, are not the real
the invocation of demons. In this specific case, the ones but only the outward appearance of the true,
entities concerned are clearly and unequivocally immaterial ones. Whereas man is conceived of as a
diabolic in nature, since they are reputed to be synthesis of the whole universe, these spirits are
“fallen from grace” with God, and to have for- only related to the element they inhabit; and, being
merly belonged to the order of the Cherubim. devoid of a soul, so that they have never sinned,
Agrippa does discuss demons as well (De occulta unlike man they will neither be granted eternal life
philosophia, Il, XV1), and places them in three cat- nor damnation. Accordingly, following Paracelsus,
egories: supracoelestes (more or less akin to mentes they have nothing in common with demons (except
floating about without a body, and to the Greek for a serious taste for practical jokes), who are
daimon), mundanos (cosmic, that is mainly zodia- fallen angels and therefore damned. The next
cal and planetary entities — such as Bruno’s) and enhancement in the cultural popularity of such
subterranei (terrestrial, mainly distributed accord- entities was Montfaucon de Villars (?163 5-1673)’
ing to the elements). Here as elsewhere, the incon- Le comte de Gabalis (1670), which enjoyed con-

--- Page 51 ---
627 INTERMEDIARY BEINGS III: RENAISSANCE
siderable fame and was to foster a whole occultistic even implied by their intrinsic nature, does not
and literary posterity on the subject, all over reflect the situation of man himself: the most
Europe and up to our day. “intermediary” being of them all, according to
Innumerable other immaterial creatures suppos- Renaissance theology, philosophy, and magic.
edly peopled the “atmosphere” around man, and
H.C. Agrippa, De occulta philosophia (V. Perrone-
were able to engage him. Larve, incubus and suc-
Compagni, ed.), Leiden: Brill, r992 # G. Bruno, De
cubus spirits, lemuriz, penates, wraiths, empuses,
monade, numero et figura, Francfort, 1591 idem,
ghosts, souls of the recently deceased, mentes, Cause, Principle and Unity, and Essays on Magic
“heroes”, etc.: an entire host of “phantoms” of (transl R. de Lucca & R. Blackwell), Cambridge:
fluid and necessarily uncertain status. They were Cambridge University Press, 1998 @ M. Casaubon, A
feared by some as malignant demons, while being True and Faithful Relation of... Dr J. Dee and Some
held by others to be more or less harmless spirits, Spirits, London, 1659 (sev. reprints) # Montfaucon de
Villars, Le comte de Gabalis, Paris, 1670 (several
causing dreams, bringing portents, conveying
reprints) @ Paracelsus, Liber de Nymphis .. . (R. Blaser,
divine orders or fiendish temptations, and gener- ed.), Bern: Francke, 1960 @ Picatrix: The Latin Version
ally supporting the absence of a conscious frontier (D. Pingree, ed.), London: The Warburg Institute,
between corporeal existence and immaterial life, 1986 @ Sefer Ha-Razim: The Book of the Mysteries
both coming under the heading of “nature”. (transl. M.A. Morgan), Chico (Ca.): Scholars Press,
1983 @ J. Trithemius, De septem secundeis, Cologne,
Tia GONG USTION 1545.
If a main characteristic of all “intermediary Lit.: D. Abrams, “The Boundaries of Divine Ontology:
beings” were to be outlined, ambiguity would be a The Inclusion and Exclusion of Metatron in the God-
perfect candidate. Not so much, perhaps, as head”, Harvard Theological Review 87 (1994), 291-
regards theoretical issues — such as types or hierar- 321 @ C. Bernardi Salvetti, Santa Maria degli Angeli
chies of entities — but most certainly in relation to alle Terme e Antonio Lo Duca, Rome-Paris: Desclée &
C., 1965 @S. Clark, Thinking with Demons: The Idea
concrete reality and practical dealings with them.
of Witchcraft in Early Modern Europe, Oxford Uni-
Theory — when it actually exists in this domain, and versity Press, 1997 @ J. Delumeau, “Histoire des men-
hampered though it is by the absence of any lexical talités religieuses dans l’Occident moderne”, Annuaire
precision — is obviously more at ease with defined du Collége de France 1986-1987: Résumés des cours et
hierarchies, often related to cosmological struc- des travaux, 404-407 O. Delenda, “Culte et repré-
ture(s), than with coping with the awe engendered sentations des Anges au temps des Réformes (XVI°-
XVIIF siécles)”, in: T. Kleindienst (ed.), Le livre et Part:
by some unexpected appearance of spirits, and
Etudes offertes en hommage a Pierre Leliévre, Paris,
the indefinitely varying manifestations of nature.
2000, 305-314 @ A. Faivre & FE Tristan (eds.), L’ange
Obviously again, intercourse with such beings is et ’homme (Cahiers de |’Hermétisme), Paris: Albin
only acceptable to Churches insofar as these are Michel, 1978 @ M. de Gandillac, “Astres, anges
able to retain control over the relevant procedures, et génies chez M. Ficin”, in: E. Castelli (ed.), Umane-
and their spiritual authority (and mediation) simo e esoterismo, Padua: CEDAM, 1960, 85-109
remains unquestioned. Whether intermediary be- @ M. Idel, “Enoch is Metatron”, Immanuel 24-25
(1990), 220-240 @ R. Mujica Pinilla, Angeles apocrifos
ings are to be considered as “conscious” entities or
en la América Virreinal, Fondo de Cultura Economica,
as impersonal “forces” is a very ambiguous issue as Lima, 19937 @ V. Perrone-Compagni, “Picatrix lati-
well — but one of crucial importance, since demons nus”, Medioevo I (1975), 237-337 @ idem, “La magia
were regarded as “personal” and intelligent beings, cerimoniale del Picatrix nel Rinascimento”, Atti del-
endowed with a perverted will, yet capable of l’Accademia di scienze morale e politiche di Napoli 88
understanding invocations and deciphering cha- (1978), 279-330 # M. Putscher, Pueuma, Spiritus,
racteres. Ficino made the most of such a distinc- Geist, Wiesbaden: O. Harrassowitz, 1973 @ J. Ries &
H. Linet (eds.), Anges et démons, Louvain-la-Neuve,
tion, by declaring impersonal (thus, not demonic)
1989 @ F. Secret, “Sur quelques traductions du Sefer
the astral spiritus and intelligences which he in- Raziel”, Revue des Etudes juives 128 (1969), 223-
voked. This very notion of spiritus in Ficino is itself 245 @ idem, Hermétisme et kabbale, Naples: Biblio-
extremely ambiguous, since it is both a medium polis, 1992, 119-146 @ idem, “La vérité sur les anges”,
and some sort of an entity, immaterial yet very Charis: Archives de l Unicorne 3 (1994), 93-107 @
much linked to physical reality, in between the N. Séd, “Sefer ha-Razim et la méthode de combinaison
des lettres”, Revue des Etudes juives 130 (1971), 295-
celestial and the terrestrial.
304 @ idem, “Un usage rituel des psaumes chez les kab-
In fact, one may well ask whether such a seem- balistes chrétiens au XVI siécle d’aprés le manuscrit de
ingly inescapable ambiguity, which appears to be P Arsenal 2495”, in: A. Caquot & P. Canivet (eds.), Rit-
implied in all dealings (whatever their shape and ualisme et Vie intérieure: Religion et culture, Paris:
aim) with intermediary beings, and is sometimes Beauchesne, 1989, 95-103 @ J.R. Veenstra, “Stretching

--- Page 52 ---
INTERMEDIARY BEINGS III: RENAISSANCE 628
the imagination: Demons between Man’s Body and grammatically announced already during the
Soul”, in: R. Suntrup & J.R. Veenstra (eds.), Tradition Renaissance in + Giovanni Pico della Mirandola’s
and Innovation in an Era of Change, Francfort, 2001, Oratio De hominis dignitate, and with roots that
203-225.
may go all the way back to e.g. Plato’s famous
image of the soul’s chariot in the Phaedrus, with
JEAN-PIERRE BRACH
one horse tending upwards and the other one
downwards — that sees Man himself as tragi-comi-
Intermediary Beings IV: cally suspended in a place “intermediary” between
18th Century — Present his higher and his lower aspirations, as famously
expressed by Alexander Pope: ‘Plac’d in this isth-
I. INTRODUCTION 2. SPIRITS mus of a middle state,/ a Being darkly wise and
3. HIERARCHIES 4. MASTERS rudely great, .../ He hangs between; in doubt to
5. EXTRATERRESTRIALS 6. CHANNELED act or rest;/ In doubt to deem himself a god or
ENTITIES beast;/ In doubt his Mind or Body to prefer;/ Born
but to die, and reas’ning but to err; ... Created
1. INTRODUCTION half to rise, and half to fall, Great lord of all things,
The ambiguity of “intermediary beings” in eso- yet a prey to all;/ Sole judge of Truth, in endless
teric contexts [see > Intermediary Beings III] was error hurl’d;/ The glory, jest and riddle of the
amplified by the impact of the new rationalist and world’ (An Essay on Man, epistle II [1733]).
materialist worldviews since the 17th and 18th Such an ironic twist on “Man the Great Miracle”
century. In the wake of the Enlightenment, there is has become quite congenial to modern(ist) sensibil-
often reason to wonder whether the very adjective ities, and places him in a position in which he alone
“intermediary” is still applicable at all. Originally, will have to make up his mind about whether to
beings such as angels or demons occupied a place prefer his “lower”, merely natural intelligence or,
intermediary between the supernatural Divine rather, listen to messages and intuitions purport-
Being and the natural world of created beings; by edly conveyed by “higher” spiritual beings or enti-
the very fact alone that they were not embodied, ties. Adherents of esoteric currents in the r9th and
angels and even demons were somehow closer to 2oth century have, of course, chosen the latter
the divine (which in the case of demons made their option. But in yet another twist on earlier tradi-
moral depravity all the more serious), while their tions, the “higher entities” have also come to play
very multiplicity distanced them from the perfec- their traditional function in an entirely new man-
tion of the One and made them closer to human ner: as representing “intermediary” stages not
embodied creatures. Even if on the basis of the between embodied creature and divine Creator, but
Judaeo-Christian legacy they were theologically between the incarnate personality and the latter’s
considered to be creatures, the alternative perspec- own “higher Self”. This option is frequent in psy-
tive originating rather from “pagan” (particularly chologized forms of esotericism since the 2oth cen-
Platonic and Hermetic) traditions — that saw them tury, usually in a context of ~ reincarnation
as emanations from the divine — remained quite as understood as a process of spiritual evolution by
influential, in Christianity generally and most cer- means of which the soul gradually overcomes
tainly in its esoteric manifestations. the limitations of the personality and realizes its
Since the 18th century, however, the notion of own divine nature. From such a perspective, all
a supernatural divine reality in the strict sense of “higher entities” may be seen as souls on their way
the word became increasingly alien to religious towards “self-realization”: intermediary some-
thought, in esoteric as well as in general religious where between the poles of complete ignorance
contexts; for even in many cases where lip-service about their own inner divinity and a supreme
is being paid to the “supernatural”, at closer “gnosis” as knowledge of the Self as divine.
scrutiny this purportedly “divine” reality actually
turns out to be conceived of as perhaps a “higher”, 2. SPIRE TS
but nevertheless a natural reality. If invisible intel- The spirits of the departed typically play an inter-
ligent “entities” are still believed to exist in such a mediary role between the divine and the human:
context, they may engage in contact with embodied they come from earth but are now closer to God
human beings, but in the absence of a supernatural than those of us who are still in the body, so they
divinity they come to play an autonomous rather are in a good position to give us messages about the
than an intermediary role. Much more typical for after-death state. With respect to modern ideas
modern consciousness is the perspective — pro- about the spirits of the deceased as intermediaries,

--- Page 53 ---
629 INTERMEDIARY BEINGS IV: 18TH CENTURY — PRESENT
the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg have been ity: they might be somewhat ahead of us in their
crucial. Swedenborg denied any essential difference spiritual evolution, but still had much to learn
between angels and spirits, claiming that all angels themselves.
have once lived on earth as human beings. To be Thus the spirits of the deceased that supposedly
precise, he distinguished between spirits, angelic manifested themselves in spiritualist seances could
spirits, and angels, and further subdivided each of by no means be seen as unproblematically mediat-
these into spiritual and celestial (governed by faith ing between human ignorance and divine truth.
and by love respectively, the latter being superior to And their limited spiritual authority was, of course,
the former). After death, each human spirit gravi- further underlined by the frequent mediocrity of
tates towards a community in heaven or in hell that the messages they conveyed by means of medi-
is in line with his true inner motivation or “ruling umship. While some mediums and “their” spirits
love”; as a result, the structure of Swedenborg’s did set themselves up as teachers of higher truths
heaven and hell automatically categorizes human (cf. “channeling”, below), in many cases the spirits
beings into a hierarchical order according to their seemed to be content merely to manifest their pres-
inner moral condition. Angelic/spiritual and de- ence by means of trivial messages or signs.
monic beings are constantly present with embodied
human beings, seeking to influence them to use 3. HIERARCHIES
their free will for good or evil; but Swedenborg Quite traditional angelic and demonic beings,
claimed that only he himself had been granted the understood in a sense close to > Gnosticism and >
privilege of actually seeing them and talking with Christian theosophy, were still prominent in 18th-
them, and of freely “traveling” through heaven and century esoteric currents such as, notably, > Mar-
hell. Spiritual and angelic beings can perceive only tinés de Pasqually’s theurgic order of the > Elus
the “internal” realities of embodied human beings Coéns and its later developments; and these tradi-
but remain as blind to any “external” realities as tions continued well into the r9th century. The gen-
human beings are to internal ones. Asa result, Swe- eral idea of “hierarchies” of non-human spiritual
denborg himself is explicitly highlighted as the only beings or entities representing various levels of
true “intermediary” between the internal and the existence, became central to occultism [> occult /
external. Only he has access to both; and as a occultism] as it developed during the rg9th century.
result, he is unique not only in that he can tell The elaborate number-symbolical tables of angelic
human beings about the realities of heaven and and demonic hierarchies provided by > Cornelius
hell, but also in that he can tell spirits and angels Agrippa (esp. Occ.Phil. Il, 5-14; Ill, 25), with some
about earthly realities. of the demons portrayed in bizarre pictures in >
Swedenborg’s ideas have had an incalculable Francis Barrett’s The Magus of 1801, certainly
impact on rgth- and zoth-century esotericism, and influenced > Bulwer-Lytton’s famous occult novel
on > Spiritualism in particular, as is clear from the Zanoni (1842), which assumes a universe full of
writings of its major theologian, > Andrew Jack- intelligent beings on all levels of reality.
son Davis. Davis’s worldview was largely modeled Such ideas came to full fruition in > Paschal Bev-
on Swedenborg’s, but he gave a _progressivist erly Randolph, whose Dealings with the Dead
and evolutionary twist to it by emphasizing an (1862), described a stream of innumerable “soul
optimistic prospect of spiritual growth and devel- monads” emanating from the “Central Sun”, and
opment, first through six spiritual spheres sur- ordered them according to a sevenfold ascending
rounding earth, and beyond these through higher hierachy: Spirits-Angels, Seraphs, Arsaphs, Eons,
spiritual realities. Spirits closest to earth could Arsasaphs, Arch-Eons, and Antarphim. By com-
communicate with human beings by means of municating with these beings, the occultist could
mediums, and such claims had two crucial impli- learn the secrets of existence that would help him in
cations. First, they opened the door for a “democ- his own process of spiritual evolution. Randolph’s
ratization” of spirit contact: far from being hierarchies were described particularly clearly in
dependent on the authority of a divinely privileged “The Mysteries of Eulis” (1874): ‘... there are
mediator like Swedenborg, everybody could com- Societies of Beings, invisible by material eyes, who
municate with the spirits and learn from them were of earth once, and others who never knew
about the higher life. And second, the fact that material bodies at all — who understand any and
these spirits were themselves still in a relatively everything man can imagine; who cultivate every
early stage of post-mortem spiritual development possible species of knowledge, and who answer the
(not yet having progressed very far “from earth”) desire and invocation . . . of those of us who take
had the effect of relativizing their spiritual author- to the same lines of thought and feeling; who

--- Page 54 ---
INTERMEDIARY BEINGS IV: 18TH CENTURY — PRESENT 630
belong to the same category of intelligences or who claiming that the former represent the truth
voluntarily place themselves under the essential whereas the latter are merely hypocritical.
conditions of rapport or contact’ (cit. in Deveney
1997, 332). The enormous powers of these hierar- 4. MASTERS
chies (the ‘arbiters of the destinies of worlds’) was A typical development in modern Theosophy [>
emphasized in the strongest possible terms: there Theosophical Society] is the idea that members of
are ‘armies of them! — Potencies, Powers, vast Intel- the occult hierarchy — and especially, in this case, of
ligences ... before whose awful grasp of mental the “Great White Brotherhood” that supervises
powers, before whose amazing sweep of mind, the spiritual evolution on our earth — may actually be
grandest intellect earth ever did or can produce, is living in our own world. As such they literally
as a pebble to a mountain range...’ (0.c., 333). embody the theosophical ideal of spiritual perfec-
Randolph called them the “Neridii”, and referred tion: being “in the world but not of it” they can use
to their teachings as “the philosophy of Eulis”. the body but are not dependent on it, free as they
Similar ideas about vast supra-human hierar- are to manifest themselves wherever they want by
chies of spiritual beings with god-like powers have means of astral travel. The theosophical “masters”
become a staple of occultist theory and practice (or “mahatmas”) were believed to live in remote
since the later roth century. As has been demon- places in the Himalayas, but frequently appeared
strated by scholars such as Godwin, Deveney, to theosophists in person, or communicated with
Mathiesen and others, they were deliberately put in them by means of letters transmitted by occult
opposition against what occultists considered the means.
more timid and intellectually inferior perspective Precedents to the notion of Masters can be found
of the spiritualists. It is clear that the higher beings in the “unknown superiors” of the high-degree
had entirely taken over the place formerly reserved masonry of the “Strikte Observanz” (18th cen-
for the Christian God. While a single Divine Source tury), which may in turn be inspired by the Rosi-
is usually mentioned as the ultimate origin of all crucian notion of a hidden brotherhood [>
reality and the final goal of spiritual evolution, this Rosicrucianism]. The idea that certain persons
is a non-personal God who does not intervene in who are leading seemingly unremarkable lives
human affairs; for all intents and purposes, it is to among us are actually powerful “adepts”, whose
the spiritual hierarchies that man has to look for real business it is to work in secret for the good
any kind of spiritual assistance he may need. of humanity (or for its ruin, as the case may be),
Within the milieus of occultists believing in such has become an important motif in occult fiction,
spiritual hierarchies, attitudes towards Christianity from Bulwer-Lytton to ~ Gustav Meyrink and a
have varied greatly, from those who saw occultism variety of more or less succcessful imitators up to
as the theory necessary to an understanding of true the present.
Christianity (see e.g. > Anna Kingsford) to those In theosophical contexts of a more Christian ori-
who developed it into an explicitly anti-Christian entation, one also finds the notion of embodied
religion (see e.g. Aleister Crowley, whose new reli- masters interpreted in a relatively traditional
gion called Thelema was based upon a revelation “incarnational” sense. ~ Rudolf Steiner inter-
by a non-human entity called Aiwass). Such differ- preted the incarnation of “the Christ” into the
ences were made possible by the moral ambiguity body of Jesus as the crucial turning point in the
of the hierarchies themselves, which could be evolution of humanity. Significantly, Steiner had
explained in many ways. In occultist literature one broken away from the Theosophical Society over
may find ideas about a grand metaphysical battle, the issue of Jiddu Krishnamurti, whose body was
behind the scenes of history, between the powers of expected by theosophists to be “inhabited” by the
“light” and “darkness”; but there are also more supreme being called “Maitreya the Christ”, in
optimistic perspectives according to which even the a kind of Second Coming. In both cases we have
so-called evil forces merely play their necessary role the idea of a material “vehicle” — Jesus in the case
in the grand process of spiritual evolution; other of Steiner, Krishnamurti in the case of the Theo-
authors suggest that the entire process is ultimately sophists — turned into a Master of Wisdom due to
beyond good and evil, and our perception of it in the incarnation of the Christ.
terms of “black and white” merely reflects our still
limited point of view; and finally, there are those in 5. EXTRATERRESTRIALS
the domains of > Satanism (e.g. the Temple of Set) Incarnated beings from other planets than earth
who deliberately choose the side of the so-called may also play the role of “intermediary beings” in
powers of darkness against those of the light, esoteric contexts. Many influential authors, such as

--- Page 55 ---
631 INTERMEDIARY BEINGS IV: 18TH CENTURY — PRESENT
Swedenborg in the 18th century and ~ Jacob Lor- increasing trend to see other (perhaps even all)
ber in the roth, wrote about their communication “entities” as inhabitants of the personal or collec-
with the inhabitants of other planets, and such con- tive unconscious. Usually this is not understood in
tacts became a standard component of Spiritualist a reductionist sense, according to which channeled
literature. In modern Theosophy as well, most entities, like personalities encountered in dreams,
planets outside our solar system were believed to be would be “merely” products of one’s own mind.
inhabited by intelligent beings, and in fact the Rather, in the context of a “sacralization of psy-
teachings of Theosophy were believed to have been chology”, the very attempt to differentiate between
planted on earth by “adepts” from Venus. This eso- “real” and “imagined” entities tends to be seen as
teric and occultist mythology became basic to the an example of narrow reductive thinking. From
worldview of + UFO traditions after World War II, such a perspective, all “entities” are images con-
and has obviously had a significant impact on po- jured up in the interior mirror of the mind, which
pular science fiction as well. Some UFO enthusiasts may help the individual on his or her path towards
claim to have physically met the extraterrestrials, self-realization. Strictly speaking, in such a context
while others believe to be in psychic contact with of radically psychologized esotericism the only
them. Usually the extraterrestrials are seen as re- “intermediary” left is the mirror of the mind itself,
presenting a higher level of spiritual attainment, which makes it possible for the human soul to “cre-
which makes it easy for them to be perceived as ate its own reality”.
semi-divine messengers from occult hierarchies
such as the Great White Brotherhood, who mani- John Patrick Deveney, Paschal Beverly Randolph: A
Nineteenth-Century Black American Spiritualist, Rosi-fest themselves to warn humanity for impending
crucian, and Sex-Magician, Albany: SUNY Press, 1997
disasters and assist them in the transition to a new
¢ Brendan French, The Theosophical Masters: An
evolutionary level. Investigation into the Conceptual Domains of H.P.
Blavatsky and C.W. Leadbeater (2 vols.), PhD thesis,
6. CHANNELED ENTITIES University of Sydney: Department of Religious Studies,
The + New Age movement has important roots 2000 @ Joscelyn Godwin, The Theosophical Enlight-
in such theosophically-oriented UFO cults, but enment, Albany: SUNY Press, 1994 # Wouter J. Hane-
graafft, New Age Religion and Western Culture:
since psychic communication with “higher enti-
Esotericism in the Mirror of Secular Thought, Leiden
ties” by no means had to limit itself to extraterres- etc.: E.J. Brill, 1996/Albany: SUNY Press, 1998, esp.
trials, the latter eventually became only one among 23-41, 182-202, 482-513 idem, “Swedenborg’s
many kinds of beings believed to be “channeled” Magnum Opus and its Reception”, in: Emanuel Swe-
by mediums. The sheer variety of these “entities” is denborg, Secrets of Heaven, West Chester: Sweden-
amazing: they include e.g. “ascended masters”, borg Association, 2005 @ J.G. Platvoet, Comparing
Religions: A Limitative Approach. An Analysis of
spirit guides, angels, extraterrestrials, various his-
Akan, Para-Creole, and Ifo-Sananda Rites and Prayers,
torical personalities (e.g. Jesus, Paul), God or “the
The Hague, Paris, New York: Mouton, 1982, esp.
Ultimate Source” himself, gods and goddesses chapter 7.
from antiquity, the collective unconscious or “Uni-
versal Mind”, nature spirits or “devas”, gnomes, WOUTER J. HANEGRAAFF
fairies, and even animals (dolphins, whales) or
plants. One channel even reported communica- Jennings, Hargrave, * 1817 London?,
tions from “the Committee”, described as a geo- t 11.3.1890 London
metrical consciousness comprised of a line, a spiral
and a multidimensional triangle! (see Hanegraaff Writer on Buddhism, Rosicrucians, Phallicism.
1996/1998, 23 nt 2) Jennings is the sole source of biographical in-
Of particular interest is the claim that it is possi- formation on himself. He states that his family
ble to channel one’s own “higher self”. Here we circumstances were ‘not poor, though not over-
encounter a line of development that has important whelmingly rich’. He grew up in the West End of
roots in the “communication with the Holy London, and in 1854 was living in Harewood
Guardian Angel” highlighted by the > Hermetic Square, Regent’s Park. He may have worked as sec-
Order of the Golden Dawn, where this “Angel” retary to an opera company manager. He had a
was frequently interpreted as being in fact the ope- brother who lived at Ambassador’s Court, St.
rator’s true higher self. Due to the rise of psychol- James’s Palace; Jennings himself used this address
ogy as a powerful hermeneutical framework for in later life, and died there.
understanding psychic experiences, with > Carl At the age of fifteen, Jennings contributed a series
Gustav Jung as a major influence, there has been an of sea-sketches to the Metropolitan Magazine, and

--- Page 56 ---
JENNINGS 632
went on to write at least two novels. His treatment Jennings’s next discovery was of the “phallic the-
of metaphysical and religious matters began with ory” of the origin of religions, hinted at by Higgins
The Indian Religions, or, Results of the Mysterious and expounded in Henry O’Brien’s The Round
Buddhism (1858). Stated to be ‘by an Indian mis- Towers of Ireland. Thus prepared, Jennings wrote
sionary’, it was written to criticize and correct the his third and (undeservedly) most successful book,
lack of understanding of the Orient, especially as The Rosicrucians (1870). This tells us almost noth-
shown in an essay on Buddhism by Max Miller ing about the Rosicrucians. Its torrent of informa-
(1823-1900) published in the London Times (17 tion serves to frame the theory that all religions
and 20.4.1857), and, more generally, in the climate derive from the original worship of mankind,
following on the Indian Mutiny of May-September which was of the one primordial energy that brings
1857. Jennings had no training or expertise in ori- the universe out of Nirvana. This was symbolized
ental studies, but he recognized a kinship between variously as Light, as Fire, as the Sun, and as the
the non-rationality of the Buddhist Nirvana, which procreative power of the male, hence by the phal-
Miller had abused, and that of some Western mys- lus or (since these writers preferred the Sanskrit
tics. Jennings cites - Cornelius Agrippa, > term) the lingam. Jennings also reveals the origin
Paracelsus, > Joan Baptista van Helmont, and > and purpose of the Order of the Garter, founded by
Emanuel Swedenborg, Thomas Taylor’s transla- Edward III in 1344. The “garter”, he explains in
tion of Plato, recent books on magnetism [> Ani- veiled terms, actually secured a lady’s menstrual
mal Magnetism] and - spiritualism, Catherine napkin, and the Order was founded ‘in honour of
Crowe’s The Night Side of Nature (1850), Joseph Woman, and to raise into dignity the expression of
Ennemoser’s History of Magic (1854), the Asiatic the condemned “means”... which is her mark
Journal and Asiatic Researches (1788-), and and betrayal, but which produced the world in pro-
William Ward’s The Religion of the Hindoos ducing Man, and which saved it in the person of the
(1815). Redeemer . . .”. These were bold thoughts in 1870.
Jennings’s second book, Curious Things of the Jennings then sees symbols of the phallus and vulva
Outside World (1860) continued his attack on everywhere he looks, especially in church and tem-
rationalism by forcing attention to the inexpli- ple architecture.
cable. It is a philosophical treatise prefaced by a Phallicism (1884) was Jennings’s last major
collection of ghost stories and tales of the super- work, and his best, gathering most of what was of
natural, similar to Crowe’s compilation. Jennings value in all his preceding ones. He complains that
now expounds a world-view based on Hermetic > other writers on the subject are destructive to faith
correspondences and Gnostic cosmology. He sees and religion, whereas he regards religion as true
the destiny of the human being as a dual path, lead- and the present book as constructive of Christian
ing either to the dissolution of self in the Pleroma belief. He writes of the magical qualities of virgin-
(which he equates to the Buddhist Nirvana), or else ity (clairvoyance, and a certain invulnerability) and
to a purifying series of > reincarnations in the on the consequences of its loss; yet, he says, when
world of the diabolical Demiurge, which have the maidenhood is maintained too long it is ‘attended
same end-result. Curious Things, published under with unutterable mischiefs’, that are Nature’s
Jennings’s own name, reproduces a large portion of revenge for the denial of her purposes. In these
The Indian Religions, but his erudition has ‘strange contradictory theosophic speculations’, as
increased. He now cites > Robert Fludd’s Mosaical he calls them, Jennings strives to express the para-
Philosophy, mentions the Rosicrucian manifestoes doxical existence of two paths of Gnosis. The first
[> Rosicrucianism I] and ~ Johann Valentin rejects creation, seeing everything manifested as a
Andreae, and the Rosicrucian Mss. of Dr. Rudd in sham and an evil, and finds its goal in the Non-
the British Museum. He gives much disorganized Being of Nirvana. The second accepts creation as
information on these and on the “Fire-Philoso- holy and aims at unity with its Creator.
phers”, whom he calls a fanatical late 16th-century Among Jennings’s other works are books on the
sect, active in almost all the countries of Europe. history of one of Judas’s thirty pieces of silver, on
Jennings now regards Fire (or Light) as the first the symbolism of church candles, on the obelisk
principle of all religions and mythologies, and finds known as Cleopatra’s Needle, sea stories, London
its symbols everywhere. He commends a ‘special stories, and (edited and partly authored by Jen-
group of books’ that share this approach to com- nings) the “Nature Worship and Mystical Series”
parative religion: Godfrey Higgins’ The Celtic (also called the “Phallic Series”) of books privately
Druids and Anacalypsis, and Sir William Drum- printed by George Redway (1880-1891). In 1890
mond’s Oedipus Judaicus. he published an expanded fourth edition of The

--- Page 57 ---
633 JEWISH INFLUENCES I: ANTIQUITY
Rosicrucians in two volumes, including in it much never seen as a relapse to something Jewish. For
from Phallicism and his other books. centuries, > Gnosticism was seen predominantly
Jennings was admitted to the Societas Rosicru- as a Christian heresy.
ciana in Anglia ($.R.I.A.) in 1870. In the same year, Modern research on Gnosticism — still seen as a
he wrote a courteous but pathetic letter to > Bul- Christian heresy — started with FE. Chr. Baur’s Das
wer-Lytton, hoping for patronage. He seems to manichdische Religionssystem (1831) and Die
have been on the fringes of esoteric circles, but Christliche Gnosis (1835). Some years later, how-
never intimate with them. In a series of letters ever, H. Graetz published a short book entitled
(1879-1887) to the publisher Robert Fryar, Jen- Gnosticismus und Judenthum (1846). With this
nings expresses contempt of almost everyone in the book he became the first to interpret various stories
spiritualist, Theosophical [> Theosophical Soci- about dogmatic disputes among the Rabbis as anti-
ety], and occultist [> occult/occultism] world, gnostic polemics. Neither Graetz’s book, however,
while making extravagant claims for his own status nor M. Friedlander’s Der vorchristliche jiidische
and wisdom. Jennings deserves credit for wrestling Gnosticismus, which was published in 1898, be-
with the metaphysical questions raised by oriental came very influential. The scholarly debate of the
philosophies, in comparison to which the concerns first half of the 2oth century was dominated by the
of most Victorian theologians and philosophers religionsgeschichtliche Schule and its “Iranian
seem rather trivial. His emphasis on sex as the hypothesis” which left little room for Judaism. It
foundation of religion, symbolism, and psychology is significant that an influential work such as
should have earned him credit as a precursor of H. Jonas’s Gnosis und spdtantiker Geist (1934)
Freudian theory. But his works are too obscurely could ignore ancient Judaism almost entirely. The
written and disorganized, and his learning too auto- Bultmann school assumed that a (largely hypothet-
didactic, to have gained him academic recognition. ical) pre-Christian adaptation of the Iranian
redeemer-myth must have existed in ancient
The Indian Religions, or, Results of the Mysterious Judaism, on which the Christian authors of the
Buddhism, London: T.C. Newby, 1858 Curious
New Testament could draw.
Things of the Outside World: Last Fire, 2 vols., Lon-
It was with the decline of the religionsge-
don: T. & W. Boone, 1860 @ The Rosicrucians, Their
Rites and Mysteries, London: J.C. Hotten, 1870 ¢@ schichtliche Schule and the successive publication
Phallicism, Celestial and Terrestrial, Heathen and of the Nag Hammadi texts that Judaism started to
Christian; its connexion with the Rosicrucians and the assume a more important place in Gnostic studies.
Gnostics and its foundation in Buddhism. With an Many of the newly-discovered Gnostic texts
Essay on Mystic Anatomy, London/New York: George seemed to rely heavily on Jewish traditions not
Redway/J.W. Bouton, 1884.
mediated through Christian channels. Therefore,
many scholars took various aspects of ancient Lit.: Joscelyn Godwin, “Hargrave Jennings”, Hermetic
Journal 1991, 49-77 @ idem, The Theosophical En- Judaism as one of or even as the crucial momentum
lightenment, Albany NY: State University of New York for the development of Gnostic systems.
Press, 1993, 261-75, 383-85 # Some insights into Jen- These approaches imply serious methodological
nings’ biography and character appear in The Letters problems due to our lack of adequate sources on
of Hargrave Jennings . . . Forming the unabridged Cor- the Jewish side: we possess neither first hand evi-
respondence with the Editor of the Bath Occult
dence of any Jewish-Gnostic system comparable to
Reprints, between 1879 and 1887, Bath: Robert H.
those preserved in the Nag Hammadi library, nor Fryar, 1895.
anything in the Jewish context that could be com-
JOSCELYN GODWIN pared to the attacks the Church fathers launched
against their Gnostic enemies. The most important
Jewish Influences I: Antiquity corpus of Jewish texts roughly contemporaneous
with Gnosticism is Rabbinic literature, but the
The nature and extent of contacts between Rabbis almost never attack their enemies explicitly,
ancient Judaism and the assortment of sources nor do they adopt foreign ideas in a way which
commonly labelled “Gnostic” (or more recently makes them easy to discern. Therefore an undeni-
“biblical demiurgical”, see Williams) is one of the able gap exists between the Gnostic sources and the
most fiercely debated issues in Gnostic studies. Jewish ones. That scholars have nevertheless so fer-
This, however, is a relatively new phenomenon. vently scrutinized Jewish sources for Gnostic ele-
The Church Fathers localized the origins of the ments is either because of their assumption that
Gnostic movement in Palestine (> Simon Magus, Gnosticism has Jewish origins, or their judgement
Dositheus), but the adherence to a Gnostic sect was that a movement which played such a powerful

--- Page 58 ---
JEWISH INFLUENCES I: ANTIQUITY 634
role in late antiquitity must have left traces in In addition to the rather unspecific descriptions
Judaism as well. of the Rabbi’s opponents and their teachings, an-
Elements related to Gnostic sources are to be other problem for interpreting Gnostic motifs both
found in two different layers of Rabbinic literature: adopted and refuted by the Rabbi arises: both
firstly, common motifs and ideas in — mainly cos- Gnosticism and Rabbinic Judaism have grown in
mological — aggadic midrashim, and _ secondly, an epoch when the existence of secondary divine
polemics against opponents and/or polemical in- powers, the problem of theodicee and cosmological
terpretations of Biblical verses. The first one to speculations were part of the general intellectual
identify traces of Gnostic influence on aggadic atmosphere. Therefore almost everything in Rabbinic
midrashim (mainly Genesis Rabba) was A. Alt- literature can theoretically be interpreted either as
mann. He analyzed midrashic interpretations of influenced by, directed against or influential on
the Tohu-wa-Bohu and the idea of the primordial Gnosticism. On the whole, Rabbinic literature thus
light in the Babylonian Talmud and Midrash Gen- provides little unambiguous evidence for either a
esis Rabba. He argued that the Rabbinic doctrine Jewish background of Gnosticism or Gnostic
of creation was formed in response to Gnosticism influence on Judaism. The search for Gnostic motifs
as ‘a rabbinic Gnosis of its own’. Most attention, in Rabbinic literature resembles the gathering of
however, was given to ‘the Gnostic background of disseminated sparks which reveal their Gnostic ori-
the Rabbinic Adam legends’ where close parallels gin only if (re)integrated into a Gnostic context.
can be drawn between the Gnostic myths about the The assumption that Rabbinic Judaism devel-
primordial man and Rabbinic cosmology. Recent oped a Gnostic branch in the form of Merkavah-
research, however, questions the importance of mysticism has influenced the study of ancient
Gnostic influence on these legends (e.g. Niditch). Jewish mysticism for some time. The first attempts
The Rabbis become strikingly imprecise when it to single out Gnostic elements in ancient Jewish
comes to discussing opinions held by persons from mysticism were made in 1893 by M. Gaster, who
outside their own circles. One group of persons claimed a Gnostic origin and high age for the pas-
who held views obviously not shared by the Rabbis sages on Shrur Oomah (lit. “measurement of the
were the minim (heretics). Many legal regulations body”) which deal with the measures of God’s
were introduced in order to draw clear-cut bound- body. A few years later, H. Odeberg identified
aries between “true Jews” and minim, and many Gnostic elements in 3 Enoch. The classic treat-
dogmatical heresies were attributed to the latter. ment of the subject, however, was provided by
All attempts, however, to identify the minim with G. Scholem. According to his interpretation, the
either Christians or Gnostics have utterly failed. In descriptions of the “Body of Truth” (Séma Alé-
Rabbinic literature, minim is a generic term which theias) of the Gnostic Markos [> Marcus the
designates not a specific group but different things Magician] can be fully understood only if inter-
at different times (cf. Goodman). A kind of sub-cat- preted as an offshoot of the Jewish Shr?ur Qomab-
egory of the minim are those who believe that speculations which thus have to be dated back well
‘there are two powers in heaven’ (shete reshuyot into the 2nd century. Moreover, the descriptions of
ba-shamayim). It is patent that some of these the heavenly realms correspond to the divine
passages may refer to Gnostic dualism, but also pléroma of the Gnostics. The ascent of the mystic
this term is far from being univocal. It may desig- through the heavens in order to receive esoteric
nate philosophical and Christian as well as Gnos- knowledge can be put in parallel with the heavenly
tic ideas (Segal). Another group of texts often ascent of the soul. The Gnostic demiurge re-appears
quoted in relation to Gnosticism describe dialogues in Jewish mysticism as Yozer Bereshit and the “Lit-
between the famous Rabbi Jose b. Halafta and a tle Yao” of the Gnostics can be found in Jewish
Roman lady (matrona). Various scholars subscribe sources as well. Numerous motifs from the Greek
to the opinion that the unnamed matrona is the dis- Magical Papyri reappear in Hekhalot-literature. In
guised representative of Gnosticism (Gershen- spite of these similarities, Scholem was aware of
zon/Slomovic, Agus); but whereas in some cases some important differences as well: unlike Gnos-
the parallels are indeed striking, others are forced. ticism, Merkavah-mysticism does not develop
Finally, the Rabbinic arch-heretic, Elisha ben myths and it is neither dualistic nor antinomis-
Avuya, alled Aher (the “Other”) is believed to have tic. Merkavah-mysticism as “Jewish Gnosticism”
held Gnostic opinions (locus classicus bHagr 5b), therefore could have developped in the heart of
but the allusions to his teachings are difficult to early Rabbinic Judaism. This assumption not only
interpret. allows Scholem to interpret several Rabbinic texts

--- Page 59 ---
635 JEWISH INFLUENCES I: ANTIQUITY
as refering to Merkavah-mysticism, but also similar Gnostic concepts. Moreover, Hellenistic
locates early Jewish mysticism in close chronologi- Judaism and the Platonic interpretation of Judaism
cal proximity to Gnosticism. by Philo contain ideas influential in Gnostic writ-
Scholem’s views, though influential among some ings, and there can be little doubt that the
of his disciples and among scholars defending a hypostazation of “wisdom” (sophia) in Gnostic lit-
Jewish origin of Gnosticism (Quispel), were sharply erature cannot be separated from its Jewish back-
criticized by both scholars of Gnosticism (e.g. ground (MacRae). The diffusion and_ further
Jonas, Yamauchi) and of ancient Judaism (e.g. development of such ideas was sometimes located
Flusser). Moreover, there is no unanimity among among Jewish baptismal sects, the “Magharians”,
scholars as to Scholem’s early dating of Hekhalot- Therapeutes or Samaritans (Fossum).
literature and whether they represent a movement The most important impact of Judaism can be
at the heart of Rabbinic Judaism rather than at detected, however, in the use of the Bible and bibli-
its fringes. Nevertheless, all subsequent studies cal exegesis. Although the depth of the knowledge
on Merkavah mysticism (Gruenwald, Halperin, of the Bible in Gnostic literature is still a matter of
Schafer) have minimized the importance of Gnosti- dispute, a strong Gnostic curiosity for certain bib-
cism. The main point of critique did not so much lical stories and motifs cannot be denied. These sto-
reflect an over-all denial of the existence of ele- ries and motifs were almost always subjected to
ments reminiscent of Gnostic sources; rather, it was heavy exegetical reworking, but some scholars
based upon the observation that the general reli- have devoted much endeavor to demonstrating
gious outlook is a different one: in addition to the that Gnostic exegesis is strongly dependent on Jew-
differences mentioned above, it may be pointed out ish models known from Rabbinic (targumim,
that the mere participation in the celestial liturgy midrashim) and medieval sources (e.g. Pearson,
seems to be the mystic’s aim (Schafer). It is indeed Stroumsa). The enormous popularity of Jewish
striking that at the very climax of the ascent, the apocryphal texts (especially Enoch-traditions)
mystic of Hekhalot-literature neither gets to see a among Gnostics corroborates these observations.
vision of the divine throne nor receive any other On the other hand, it has to be recognized that
kind of redemptive, secret knowledge. Therefore, the Gnostic interest in Judaism is obviously a rather
seemingly similar liturgical passages in Gnostic and selective one (mainly cosmological and focused on
Hermetic texts (NHC I,15,5ff.; NHC VI, 59-61, the mythological chapters of Genesis), and the anti-
Poimandres 30ff.) have a different function, since Jewish attitude displayed in some texts is patent.
there God is praised for the revelation of redemp- Moreover, not all the Jewish sources mentioned
tive truth. above (Philo, most apocryphal texts etc.) can be
The general survey of Jewish sources roughly called Gnostic, and scholarship has failed to point
contemporary with Gnostic scriptures shows that out a convincing inner-Jewish factor for a “Gnostic
from what we positively know about ancient turn”. Most important, however, is the fact that the
Judaism, we cannot deduce that “Gnosticism” of Jewish sources at our disposal today almost never
any kind played a dominant role among the Jews. match the evidence extrapolated from Gnostic
The search for Jewish influences on Gnostic sources directly. This does not mean that Jewish
sources therefore does not so much arise from the trends unattested in ancient Jewish literature could
Jewish sources themselves but from a hermeneuti- not have existed. But due to a lack of adequate
cal need of the interpretation of Gnostic and Her- sources many scholars resort to more or less plau-
metic (Poimandres, cf. Holzhausen; Asclepius, cf. sible hypothetical reconstructions of underlying
Philonenko) texts: many of these texts seem to “Jewish myths”, which cannot be positively sub-
reveal such strong Jewish influences without being stantiated from Jewish sources, and implement
predominantly Christian that the question whether rather unspecific terms such as “pre-Gnostic”,
Judaism was among those who stood at the cradle “proto-Gnostic” or “heterodox” Judaism, “semi-
of Gnosticism (and Hermetism) is a natural one. Judaism” and certain unattested “Jewish circles”.
In some cases, the influence of Jewish ideas and It can be stated that Gnostics were obviously
motifs led to the far-reaching assumption that attracted by Jewish ideas on various levels. How-
Gnosticism as a whole was ofJewish origin. Grant, ever, one should be cautious not to hypostasize this
e.g., argued that the experience of the Jewish defeat selective curiosity and knowledge displayed in
in the war against the Romans was a catalyst for Gnostic texts into a real branch of ancient Judaism.
Gnosticism, whereas others highlighted dualistic According to the sources available to us today, it
teachings from Qumran as possible predecessors of remains an open question whether the Jewish

--- Page 60 ---
JEWISH INFLUENCES I: ANTIQUITY 636
elements adopted and reworked in the Gnostic Lit.: H. Graetz, Gnosticismus und Judentum, Kroto-
writings were simply “Jewish”, “heterodox”, “pre- schin: Monasch, 1846 @ M. Friedlander, Der vor-
christliche Gnosticismus, Gottingen: Vandenhoek &Gnostic” or “proto-Gnostic”, and whether their
Ruprecht, 1898 @ M. Gaster, “Das Shiur Komah”,
occurrence reveals an intimate, first-hand knowl-
MGW] 37 (1893), 179-185 # H. Odeberg, 3 Enoch or
edge of Jewish traditions or the knowledge of inter- the Hebrew Book of Enoch, Cambridge: Cambridge
ested “outsiders”. Whereas there is clear evidence University Press, 1928, reprinted New York: KTAV
for a use or even instrumentalization of Jewish Publishing House, 1973 # A. Altmann, “Gnostic
motifs and ideas in Gnostic thinking, we can speak Themes in Rabbinic Cosmology”, in: I. Epstein (ed.),
of Jewish influence only in the restricted sense that Essays, Festschrift ].H. Hertz, London: Edward Gold-
ston, 1942, 19-32 @ idem, “The Gnostic Background
the active role of Jews and a decisive influence of
of the Rabbinic Adam Legends”, in: JSO 35 (1944/45),
Jewish concepts in the development of the Gnostic
371-391 @ D. Flusser, “Scholem’s recent book on Mer-
message(s) cannot be firmly established. kavah Literature”, in: /JS 11 (1960), 57-68 @ G. Scho-
In recent years, scholars have called for strict lem, Jewish Gnosticism, Merkabah Mysticism and
methodological criteria for analyzing mutual Talmudic Tradition, New York: Jewish Theological
“influences” of ancient Jewish mysticism on Gnos- Seminary, 1965 @ H. Jonas, “Response to G. Quispel’s
ticsm and vice versa. Models of direct borrowing Gnosticism and the New Testament”, in: J. Philip (ed.),
The Bible in Modern Scholarship, Nashville/New
from one side by the other and the assumption of
York: Abingdon, 1965, 279-293 @ G. MacRae, “The
common sources have to be supplemented by mod- Jewish Background of the Gnostic Sophia Myth”, in:
els which allow parallel though genealogically Novum Testmentum 12 (1970), 86-101 @ M. Philo-
independent developments and influences medi- nenko, “Le Poimandres et la liturgie juive”, in:
ated through other sources, such as magical litera- F Dunand and P. Lévéuge (ed.), Les syncretismes dans
ture (Alexander). Also, a distinction must be made les religions de l’Antiquité, Leiden: Brill, 1975, 204ff. #
between phenomenological and historical parallels idem, “Une Allusion de l’Asclepius au livre d’Henoch”,
in: J. Neusner, Christianity, Judaism and other Greco-
(Dan).
Roman Cults, Leiden: Brill, 1975, 161ff. @ EF. Segal,
+ Magic has always been seen as an important Two Powers in Heaven, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1977 @
melting pot for Jewish, Christian, Gnostic and M. Philonenko, “Une Utilisation de Shema dans le
Pagan ideas in late antiquity. Recent studies on Poimandrés”, in: Revue d’Histoire et de Philosophie
Jewish and Greek magical texts have indeed Religieuses 59 (1979), 369ff. @ I. Gruenwald, Apoca-
brought to light a number of striking parallels (e.g. lyptic and Merkavah Mysticism, Leiden: E.J. Brill,
1980 @ A. Agus, “Some Early Rabbinic Thinking onSperber, Veltri, Schafer/Shaked). Moreover, more
Gnosticism”, in: JOR 71 (1980/81), 18-30 @ I. Gruen-
and more evidence for close contacts between Jew-
wald, “The Problem of Anti-Gnostic Polemic in Rab-
ish and Christian magic comes to light. The binic Literature”, in: R. van den Broek (ed.), Studies in
specifically Gnostic character of most of the Greek Gnosticism and Hellenistic Religions, Leiden: E.J.
magical texts, however, is no longer generally Brill, 1981, 171-189 @ E.M. Yamauchi, “Jewish Gnos-
accepted (cf. Brashear), so that the textual basis for ticism?”, in: van den Broek (ed.), op. cit. 467-497 @
Jewish-Gnostic studies is rather limited here as S. Niditch, “The Cosmic Adam: Man as Mediator in
Rabbinic Literature”, in: JJS 35 (1983), 137-146 @ Ph.well. Unambigious Gnostic motifs in Jewish magi-
Alexander, “Comparing Merkavah Mysticism and
cal texts exist but are rather rare (Leicht). Close
Gnosticism”, in: JJS 35 (1984), 1-18 @ G. Stroumsa,
connections between Jews, Christians, ~ Man- Another Seed: Studies in Gnostic Mythology, Leiden:
daeans and even Manichaeans [> Manichaeism] Brill, 1984 @ B. Pearson, “Jewish Sources in Gnostic
are attested by the magic bowls from late Sassanian Literature”, in: M.E. Stone (ed.), Jewish Writings ofthe
Mesopotamia, but the comprehensive historical Second Temple Period, Assen: Van Gorcum, 1984 @
and philological analysis of these texts is still in its J. Fossum, The Name of God and the Angel of the
Lord: Samaritan and Jewish Concepts of Intermedia-
beginning phase.
tion and the Origin of Gnosticism, Tiibingen: J.B.C.
Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 1985 # R. Gershenzon/E. Slo-
P. Schafer (ed.), Synopse der Hekhalot-Literatur, movic, “A Second Century Jewish-Gnostic Debate:
Tubingen: J.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 1981 @ Trans- Rabbi Jose ben Halafta and the Matrona”, in: JS] 16
lations: Ph. Alexander (ed., trans.), “III (Hebrew (1985), 1-41 @ Peter Schafer, The Hidden and Manifest
Apocalypse of) Henoch” in: J.H. Charlesworth, The God: Some Major Themes in Early Jewish Mysticism,
Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, I, London: Double- Albany: SUNY Press, 1992 @ D. Sperber, “Some Rab-
day, 1983, 223-315 @ P. Schafer et al. (trans.), Die binic Themes in Magical Papyri”, in: JS] 16 (1985), 93-
Ubersetzung der Hekhalot-Literatur, I-IV, Tiibingen: 103 @ D.J. Halperin, The Faces of the Chariot,
J.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 1987-1995 @ P. Schafer Tubingen, 1988 @ B. Pearson, Gnosticism, Judaism,
and Sh. Shaked (eds.), Magische Texte aus der Kairoer and Egyptian Christianity, Minneapolis: Fortress
Geniza, I-III, Tubingen: C.J.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), Press, 1990 @ J. Holzhausen, Der “Mythos vom Men-
1994-1999. schen” im hellenistischen Agypten, Bodenheim: Athe-

--- Page 61 ---
637 JEWISH INFLUENCES II: MIDDLE AGES
naum Hain Hanstein, 1994 # W.M. Brashear, “The ered recently (Prayer of Jacob/Ladder of Jacob).
Greek Magical Papyri: An Introduction and Survey; Moreover, it is a conspicuous temporal coincidence
Annotated Bibliography (1928-1994)”, in: ANRW
that apocryphal traditions unknown from Rab-
II.18.5, Berlin: Walter De Gruyter, 1995, 3380-3684
binic sources suddenly re-appear in Jewish mid-
J. Dan, “Jewish Gnosticism?”, in: JSO 2 (1995), 309-
328 @ M. Goodman, “The Function of Minim in Early rashic texts in medieval Western Europe (e.g.
Rabbinic Judaism”, in: P. Schafer (ed.), Geschichte- Midrash Tadsheh, Chronicle of lerahmeel, Bereshit
Tradition-Reflexion, Festschrift Martin Hengel, Tibin- Rabbati), when Christian heretical movements
gen: J.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 1996, 501-510 @ flourished there as well.
G. Veltri, “Jewish Traditions in Greek Amulets”, in: The most important revival of ideas and motifs
Bulletin of Judaeo-Greek Studies 18 (1996), 33-47 #
akin to Gnostic thinking in Jewish literature is
M.A. Williams, Rethinking Gnosticism: An Argument
attested in the writings of early Kabbalah. G. for Dismantling a Dubious Category, Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1996 @ R. Leicht, “Gnostic Scholem was the first to interpret central teachings
Myth in Jewish Garb: Niriyah (Norea), Noah’s Bride”, of the Book Bahir as repercussions of ancient >
in: JJS 51 (2000), 133-140. Gnosticism: for the first time in Jewish sources,
God is theosophically described not merely as a
REIMUND LEICHT heavenly king but with a pleroma of hypostatized
potencies and a cosmic tree as the totality of his
Jewish Influences II: Middle Ages powers. M. Idel radicalized this view and argues
that the Book Bahir reveals fragments of ancient
The Middle Ages are largely characterized by a Jewish Gnosticism which predates the ancient non-
process towards a successive domination of public Jewish Gnostic sources. As a matter of fact, in
life by Rabbinic Judaism, on the one hand, and many respects the Book Babhir is much more remi-
Roman Catholic or Orthodox Christianity, on the niscent of ancient Gnosticism than Hekhalot-liter-
other. Although “orthodoxy” sometimes set up ature, since it contains for the first time a detailed
rather strict rules to impede interreligious contacts, theosophical and mythological account of the cre-
exchange of ideas between Jews and their non- ation of the world and of man. The hypothesis that
Jewish contemporaries always existed. The differ- the contemporary Cathar movement [> Cathar-
ent fields of esoteric lore, heretical ideas, > magic ism] may have influenced the early Kabbalah could
and > mysticism were always seen as particularly not be substantiated so far (Scholem, Shahar).
fertile grounds for such contacts. Gnostic-dualistic concepts can also be found in
Medieval Jewish and non-Jewish esoteric lore is 13th-century Castilian Kabbalah (Cohen-brothers)
based upon ancient foundations. One of the main with the concept of the “emanation of the left side”
sources for the transmission of Jewish esoteric lore as a satanic realm within the godhead, and in 16th-
in Antiquity were apocryphal and pseudepigraphic century Lurianic Kabbalah, which located the ori-
writings. The relevance of various apocryphal texts gin of evil within God himself and created a myth
in the development of medieval Christian sects can- about the fallen sparks of the souls through the
not be denied, but a growing number of sources “breaking of the vessels”. These traditions were
shows that these traditions did not vanish from further developped in Sabbatianism (17th cent.)
Judaism with the decline of the Hellenistic Dias- with its “gnostic” concept of a Messiah who has to
pora in the 2nd century CE. either. The Hebrew enter the realm of evil in order to redeem the dis-
Book of Enoch (6th cent. C.E.), e.g., is an adapta- persed divine sparks. In other kabbalistic schools
tion of ancient Enoch-traditions in the spirit of and works like the Zohar (13th cent.), “gnostic”
Hekhalot-literature. At different times, too, apoca- motifs play a minor role. It has to be noted, how-
lyptic traditions were revitalized (e.g. Apocalypse ever, that “gnostic” motifs in Jewish mystical sys-
of Zerubbabel, 7th cent. C.E.). Therefore, the tems paradoxically become stronger the more they
occurrence of apocryphal traditions in medieval are historically remote from ancient Gnosticism
Christian sources can reflect either developments (Dan).
of previously adopted traditions or direct Jewish Kabbalah developed in close geographical vicin-
influences. The latter could be the case with some ity to the medieval centres of Christian intellectual
apocryphal material preserved in Old Slavonic life. Many kabbalists adopted philosophical
sources (Palaia-literature) probably influential on (mainly neoplatonic [> Neoplatonism]) and reli-
the “Gnostic” Bogomil movement [> Bogomil- gious ideas current in their Christian environment.
ism]. Some of these texts may have been translated In spite of certain resemblances, however, there is
directly from Hebrew (Apocalypse of Abraham) almost no evidence that kabbalistic teachings
and of others, Hebrew versions have been discov- influenced their Christian contemporaries prior

--- Page 62 ---
JEWISH INFLUENCES II: MIDDLE AGES 638
to the beginnings of Christian Kabbalah in the Lit.: M. Steinschneider, Die Hebriischen Ubersetzun-
Renaissance. In a time of religious disputations on gen des Mittelalters und die Juden als Dolmetscher,
Graz: Akademische Druck.- und Verlagsanstalt, 1956
the Hebrew Bible and the Talmud, kabbalists were
(repr. of Berlin, 1893) # R. Levy, The Astrological
not eager to popularize their esoteric teachings
Works of Abraham Ibn Ezra: A literary and linguistic
among Christians either. Evidence for occasional study with special reference to the Old French transla-
contacts (cf. Kieckhefer) have to be analyzed care- tion of Hagin, Maryland/Paris: John Hopkins Press/
fully with respect to possible sources. Presses Universitaires de France, 1927 @ I. Tishby,
Jews undoubtedly played an important role in “Gnostic Doctrines in Sixteenth Century Jewish Mys-
the transmission of ~ astrology, > hermetism, ticism”, in: JJS 6 (1955), 146-152 J.T. Milik, The
Books of Enoch: Aramaic Fragments of Qumran Cave
magic and astral magic from the Arabic into the
4, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976 # R. Rubinkiewicz,
Latin world, just as they did in many other fields of
“Apocalypse of Abraham”, in: J. Charlesworth (ed.),
medieval science: astrology and astral magic have The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, vol. 1, London:
strongly influenced the thinking of medieval Jewish Darton, Longman & Todd, 1983, 681-705 # G. Scho-
philosophers like Yehudah ha-Levi (1085-1145), lem, “Alchemie und Kabbala”, in: Judaica 4, Frankfurt
Abraham bar Hiyyah (died ca. 1136) and in partic- am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1984, 19-128 @ M. Idel,
ular the famous exegete Abraham Ibn Ezra (1093- “The Origin of Alchemy According to Zosimos and a
Hebrew Parallel”, in: REJ 145 (1986), 117-124 @
1168), whose scientific astrological works were
G. Scholem, Origins of the Kabbalah, ed. by RJ.
also translated into many medieval European lan- Werblowsky, trans. by A. Arkush, New York/Prince-
guages (cf. Levy). Numerous Hebrew translations ton: JPS/Princeton UP, 1987 @ M. Idel, Kabbalah: New
show that Spanish Jews were active as translators Perspectives, New Haven/London: Yale UP, 1988 ¢@
of ancient and medieval treatises from Arabic A. d’Agostino (ed.), Alfonso X El Sabio: Astromagia,
sources, but also originally Jewish texts written in Napoli: Liguori Editore, 1992 # Y.Z. Langerman,
“Some Astrological Themes in the Thought of Abra-the spirit of hermetic astral magic seem to have
ham Ibn Ezra”, in: I. Twersky and J.M. Harris (eds.),
existed. An example in case is the Latin Sefer Raziel
Rabbi Abraham Ibn Ezra: Studies in the Writings of a
(which is not always identical with the Hebrew Twelfth-Century Jewish Polymath, Cambridge MA/
books entitled Sefer Raziel and Sefer ha-Razim). It London: Harvard UP, 1993, 28-85 @R. Patai, The Jew-
was translated in the twelfth century and later ish Alchemists, Princeton: Princeton UP, 1994 @ J. Dan,
revised, together with other presumably Jewish “Jewish Gnosticism?”, in: JSO 2 (1995), 309-328 @
works, under the auspices of Alfonso X Sabio (cf. R. Kieckhefer, “The Devil’s Conetmplatives: The Liber
Turatus, the Liber Visionum and Christian Appropria-
Steinschneider, Leicht). In these texts, many of the
tion of Jewish Occultism”, in: C. Fanger (ed.), Conjur-
traditions commonly linked with > Hermes Tris-
ing Spirits: Texts and Traditions of Medieval Ritual
megistus or Apollonius of Tyana are attributed to Magic, Sutton: Stroud, 1998, 250-265 @ R. Leicht,
Adam, Enoch or Solomon. However, most of the “Oedushah and Prayer to Helios: A New Hebrew Ver-
relevant Hebrew material is still unpublished and sion of an Apocryphal Prayer of Jacob”, in: JSO 6
requires further investigation. Many other manu- (1999), 140-176 @ D. Schwartz, Astral Magic in
scripts do not predate the Renaissance, and there- Medieval Jewish Thought (Hebrew), Ramat Gan: Bar
Ilan UP, 1999 @ Reimund Leicht, Astrologumena
fore a careful investigation is needed in order to
Judaica: Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der astrolo-
isolate medieval Jewish traditions from younger gischen Literatur der Juden, Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck,
Jewish translations from Latin sources (e.g. Clavi- 2005.
cula Salomonis — Mafteah Shelomoh).
During the whole Middle Ages, scholars were REIMUND LEICHT
obsessed by the idea that > alchemy was a science
in which Jews were especially active. Although Jewish Influences III: “Christian
many of the traditions which have grown from this Kabbalah” in the Renaissance
idea are legendary, recent research recognizes a cer-
tain Jewish influence on ancient and medieval The term “kabbalah” in the concept “Christian
alchemy and argues that alchemy played a more kabbalah” is a misleading one: it suggests a phe-
important role among medieval Jewish scholars nomenon much narrower in scope than the works
than hitherto assumed (Idel, Patai). Already Scho- of the thinkers included in it actually present. The
lem was able to show, however, that in the classical group of humanists in Florence at the end of the
works of Kabbalah alchemy is occasionally alluded 15th century and the beginning of the sixteenth
to, but that it forms no constitutive factor in kab- who laid the foundations of this important current
balistic thinking. The great synthesis of alchemy in European esotericism discovered and adopted
and kabbalistic symbolism did not happen during into Christian culture the whole wealth of Hebrew
the Middle Ages but is a Renaissance and post- post-Biblical creativity: the Talmud and the Mid-
Renaissance phenomenon. rash, the Jewish prayer-book, medieval Hebrew

--- Page 63 ---
639 JEWISH INFLUENCES III: “CHRISTIAN KABBALAH” IN THE RENAISSANCE
biblical commentaries, the writings of Jewish ratio- mainstream theology. In fact, even today, most
nalistic philosophy, and non-kabbalistic Jewish Christian thinkers are closer to Pico’s and >
mysticism of Antiquity and the Middle Ages. They Reuchlin’s opponents than to the latter’s new
themselves often used the term “kabbalah” to approach. The main Jewish idea which the “Chris-
denote all this vast library, encompassing Hebrew tian kabbalists” adopted, therefore, is that which
religious traditions extended over nearly a millen- denies the novelty of the Talmud and Midrash and
nium and half; in this they did follow Jewish con- much of medieval Jewish culture, and sees them as
cepts, which saw the oral torah, including its legal a continuation of an oral tradition which began in
and exegetical material, as the “tradition” (i.e. the biblical times and was preserved unchanged by
literal meaning of Kabbalah) which Moses had Jewish scholars. The term “kabbalah” in the con-
received on Mount Sinai by oral revelation directly cept “Christian kabbalah” should therefore be
from God and transmitted to the elders of Israel, understood in the original, general, Hebrew mean-
who in turn had transmitted it to the judges and the ing of the term, that is, Tradition.
prophets and so on, from generation to generation. The material which the early Christian kabbal-
The narrower meaning of “kabbalah”, as relating ists derived from the Hebrew sources was, to some
to the esoteric tradition concerning the secrets of extent, just information (for instance, Pico quotes
the divine realm which begins in the late 12th cen- Rabbi Eleazar of Worms’s Wisdom of the Soul
tury, is a result of the desire on the part of the new |Hokhmat ha-Nefesh] as the authority for the fact
medieval esotericists to insist that their ideas con- that the legs of the cancer can be divided into
cerning the structure and nature of the divine world “hands and feet”): details concerning nature,
is part of the more general “kabbalah”, or tradi- earthly and celestial, which may be regarded as
tion — that is, of the oral torah — and not a medieval belonging to the realm of science, and more than
innovation. This distinction is important, because that, mainly of a methodological-linguistic kind.
it expresses the nature of the Christian interest in The Hebrew sources introduced the humanists to a
this realm: the humanists believed that they had new concept of language, very different from that
discovered another important layer of divine truth which prevailed in Christian culture. This concept,
which was preserved in Jewish extra-biblical tradi- and the exegetical methodologies derived from it,
tions. The notion that the appearance of the Chris- are characteristic of the Jewish midrash, and
tian Kabbalah in late-15th century Florence is one involves a group of hermeneutical procedures which
of Christian mystics discovering Jewish > mysti- do not have a counterpart in Christianity. Christian
cism is completely erroneous. The Florentine scriptures were studied and interpreted in their
humanists were not mystics, and what they discov- translated form, mainly Latin; and therefore the
ered in the Hebrew sources that they studied was semiotic level of meaning — the only one that is
not mysticism. They were looking into many direc- transmitted in translation — was almost the exclu-
tions in search of ancient secrets: the Egyptian sive one. In contrast, Hebrew scriptures were re-
hieroglyphs, the enigmatic Hermetic treatises [> garded as written in a divine language which
Hermetic Literature], and many other places, and preceded the creation and was a means for the
within this framework they also became inter- physical creation (‘And God said let there be light
ested — sometimes intensely so — in Jewish ancient and there was light’, Gen. 1:3); it was a part of the
traditions known as “kabbalah”. The emphasis on infinite divine wisdom, rather than a means for
a particular aspect of this vast tradition — that of human communication, and therefore its meaning
the writings of the Jewish kabbalists concerning the could never be exhausted. The midrash did not
divine world — occurred much later, and was never seek a definite, final meaning or meanings of the
an exclusive one. > Giovanni Pico della Mirandola verses, but was open to ever-increasing additional
and his friends and followers extended the Christ- meanings, even when these were different and
ian sanctification of the Hebrew bible to the total- conflicting. The means of revealing these meanings
ity of Jewish tradition: a courageous and radical were not found only on the semantic level; rather,
theological breakthrough, which stood in opposi- letter, word and verse represented a semiotic entity,
tion to the current Christian attitude of rejection conveying messages by means of the shapes of the
and hatred towards the Talmud and everything letters, the vocalization and musical signs (nikkud,
descended from it, as well as to the theological teamim), their adornments (tagin), their numbers
insistence that after the appearance of the New Tes- and numerical values (gematria), acronyms of many
tament Jewish culture was destined to decline and kinds, including letter endings (motarikon), and the
stagnation. This novel approach had a significant transmutation of letters into others, according to
impact on Christian esotericism in the following fixed rules (temurah). The library of Jewish texts
centuries, but was never accepted by Christian which was available to the Renaissance humanists,

--- Page 64 ---
JEWISH INFLUENCES III: “CHRISTIAN KABBALAH” IN THE RENAISSANCE 640
in Latin translation or in the Hebrew originals, aspects of the Jewish tradition which they read or
included extensive use of these methodologies as it was translated to them, because it served as a
(especially in the writings of Rabbi Judah the Pious fundamental element in the understanding of the
of Regensburg, Rabbi Eleazar of Worms and Rabbi structure of the universe, of Man, and of God
Abraham Abulafia). These methodologies (which throughout the teachings of most of the Jewish
are not directly associated with kabbalah in the schools of thought represented in those writings.
narrow sense of the term; some kabbalists used The Hasidey Ashkenaz (the Pietists and Esotericists
them extensively, others very rarely) opened up of medieval Germany) believed and developed it,
new vistas of interpretation and the discovery of and it is found as well in the kabbalists of Spain and
secrets for Christian scholars; they constituted a the writings of Abulafia. As these concepts were
fascinating novelty and would remain characteris- central to the world-view of the humanists of the >
tic of the works of Christian kabbalists in later cen- Ficino school, where they received support from
turies. One of the most potent ideas in this context other classical and medieval sources as well,
was the description of creation by means of the together they formed a powerful body of ideas
letters of the alphabet, as presented in the Sefer Yet- which had a major impact on the theological and
zirah (both the original and the various commen- scientific schools in the 16th, 17th and even the
taries on it figured prominently in the library of the 18th centuries in Europe.
Christian kabbalists). It is ironic that those elements in kabbalistic writ-
The first discovery that attracted the Christian ings according to the narrow meaning of the term,
scholars was that of the multiplicity of the names of which are usually identified as gnostic in some
God, a concept unfamiliar in Christian culture. The sense, actually exerted the least impact on the
ancient translators into Greek of the Hebrew bible Christian kabbalah. The duality of gender within
translated the Hebrew names of God into words the godhead — a new, revolutionary concept found
(God, theos, the Lord), and thus obscured the fact for the first time in the book Babir (circa 1185) and
that God is referred to in the Hebrew bible by dif- which became basic to the erotic myths of the
ferent names. The Hebrew tetragrammaton evoked Zohar and other kabbalistic writings — did not
significant Christian interest during the Middle make much of an impression on the Christian kab-
Ages (mainly through the works of Jewish converts balists, who had a celestial feminine figure of their
to Christianity), but now a whole field of sacred own in the person of Maria. Likewise, the kabbal-
names and their interpretations was opened up. A istic pleroma of ten divine emanations — the sefirot-,
personal name is that part of language which does though often mentioned and discussed, did not
not carry any semantic message; it is just a refer- present a novel aspect for speculation for the Chris-
ence to its bearer. Christianity had only one such tian scholars, probably because they already had at
name, Jesus, while Judaism — including its esoteric their disposal a vast body of literature and specula-
and kabbalistic sources — contained an almost tion on the trinity, which they believed to find back
infinite treasury of them. The Christian scholars in the kabbalistic structure. Nor did the dualistic
returned to the existing tradition of tetragramma- world-view of the Zohar and subsequent kabbalis-
ton interpretations, but this time as a field contain- tic works, in which the celestial and the human
ing enormous exegetical possibilities. One of the worlds were conceived as battlegrounds between
best-known examples is Reuchlin’s historical inter- the forces of good and evil, attract their attention,
pretation of the Name: its early version was Shad- because most of them opposed the dualistic con-
dai (SDY, three letters in Hebrew), which was the cepts which were gaining ground within Christian-
name by which God revealed himself to the patri- ity at that time. Expressions of Jewish messianism
archs; in the age of the Torah the tetragrammaton and apocalypticism were not meaningful to them
(YHVH, four letters) was supreme, and in the age either, but were often interpreted in a Christologi-
of redemption the name consisted of five letters — cal manner .
YHVSH — which was read as Yehosha, that is, This pattern was repeated during the second
Jesus. phase of the development of the Christian kab-
Another meaningful discovery was that of the balah, when the first Lurianic texts were translated
Hebrew expression of the concept of harmonia into Latin and had a significant impact on Euro-
mundi — macrocosm and microcosm in harmony pean esotericists. From the elaborate, multi-faceted
and symmetry — as expressed in the Sefer Yetzirah Lurianic myth, which included important new
and its numerous interpretations in the Jewish tra- ideas like the primordial catastrophe within the
dition. The Christian scholars could find expres- divine world before the creation — the failed
sions and elaborations of these concepts in all attempt of the Godhead to emanate a system of

--- Page 65 ---
641 JEWISH INFLUENCES III: “CHRISTIAN KABBALAH” IN THE RENAISSANCE
divine powers, described in Lurianic terminology ré6th-century textbook of esoteric and occult phi-
as “the breaking of the vessels” [shevirah], and the losophy, and it presents the kabbalah as a discipline
on-going process of theurgic correction [tikkun]| — dealing mainly with ~ magic and numerology [>
very little was absorbed by the Christian scholars. Number Symbolism], together with other esoteric
This “breaking of the vessels”, which caused traditions of the Renaissance. For nearly five hun-
numerous divine sparks to be scattered, captive of dred years now the erroneous image of the kab-
the evil powers and yearning to be saved, is espe- balah as a fuzzy discipline combining > witchcraft,
cially reminiscent of ancient gnostic myths. The number mysticism and magic has persisted; it is
most influential Lurianic concept which was inte- dominant today even among Hebrew readers in
grated in European thought was the zimzum, the Israel, who have absorbed the European image of
primordial withdrawal of God into Himself before this traditional Jewish discipline.
the beginning of the positive processes of emana- After the great upsurge of attempts to translate
tion and creation. This concept came to be inter- and study Hebrew kabbalistic works, later Christ-
preted mainly in a philosophical manner, and the ian kabbalists, in Scholem’s words, ‘remained con-
possibilities for speculations of a gnostic type were tent to speculate in the realm of Christian kabbalah
neglected. without any firsthand knowledge of the sources.
While Pico had around him devoted Jewish Indeed, in the course of time the knowledge ofJew-
teachers of kabbalah like Yohanan Alemanno, and ish sources diminished among the Christian kab-
translators like Flavius Mithridates, and > Reuch- balists, and consequently the Jewish element in
lin had a teacher like Luanz, there were Jewish their books became progressively slighter, its place
scholars who objected to his enterprise. Further- being taken by esoteric Christian speculations
more, Pico studied the writings of Aristotle with a whose connections with Jewish motifs were re-
Jewish scholar, Rabbi Eliyahu del Mediggo, who mote’ (Kabbalah, 199). In the second half of the
tried to dissuade the young count from indulging in 16th century there began a process of associating
kabbalah and concentrate on the study of Aris- the kabbalah with > alchemy, and presenting both
totelian philosophy. When Pico chose the opposite as one and the same doctrine, despite the fact that
way, Del Mediggo expressed his frustration by alchemy was rather marginal in the history of Jew-
writing a theological treatise, published in Hebrew ish culture in general and the Hebrew kabbalah in
in 1490, which is the first systematic attack on the particular (this identification of kabbalah and
kabbalah and the first clear statement that the alchemy has been reaffirmed in strong terms in the
Zohar is a medieval composition. There can be lit- 2oth century, in the writings of > Carl Gustav
tle doubt that Pico heard these views from Rabbi Jung).
Eliyahu, but he apparently rejected them, accepting There were, however, exceptions to this general
instead the insistent claim of the kabbalists that picture, which caused a new resurgence of interest
their teachings are derived from ancient sources. in the Jewish kabbalah during the last decades of
Pico and Reuchlin made very little use of the the 17th century and the beginning of the 18th. The
Zohar itself; they often relied on secondary sources, most prominent among them was the great anthol-
like the Torah commentary of Rabbi Menachem ogy of kabbalistic texts, Kabbalah Denudata (three
Recanati. Other Christian kabbalists did use the volumes, 1677-1684), by > Christian Knorr von
Zohar, like > Francesco Giorgio (1460-1541) of Rosenroth. In this collection the kabbalah is pre-
Venice, whose De Harmonia Mundi exerted a sented by means of its authentic masterpieces, from
significant influence during the Renaissance, and the Zohar to the Lurianic kabbalah. From these
who introduced some keen observations concern- volumes a line of influence was spreading to the
ing the nature of language (resulting from his expe- heart of Christian creativity during this period. At
rience with the kabbalistic use of language). Less the end of the Kabbala Denudata is inserted an
influential, though profound and insightful, was anonymous treatise, whose author has been iden-
the use of the Zohar by the great mystic > Guil- tified as one of the most profound writers among
laume Postel in Paris; he translated sections of the the Christian kabbalists: the Flemish scholar >
Zohar (as well as the Sefer Yetzirah), but these were Franciscus Mercurius van Helmont, who wrote
not printed until the 2oth century. several other Christian kabbalistic treatises. His
The image of the kabbalah in the history of writings had meaningful influence in several direc-
Christian thought was shaped to a very large extent tions: on Leibniz (with whom he was closely asso-
by the popular work of Cornelius Agrippa of ciated, and who completed one of his works left
Nettesheim’s De Occula Philosophia libri tres unfinished at his death) and his school of thought,
(1533). This work became the most important and, in another direction, on ~ Henry More, >

--- Page 66 ---
JEWISH INFLUENCES III: “CHRISTIAN KABBALAH” IN THE RENAISSANCE 642
Ralph Cudworth and other representatives of the Athanasius Kircher) it had served as a theological
Cambridge Platonists. His impact can be traced and philosophical paradigm, the Enlightenment
among important scientists and philosophers, situated it firmly outside its more narrowly-drawn
including + Newton and Locke. frontiers of reason. Immanuel Kant (1724-1804),
A special case is the relationship between the for example, in his satirical discussion of > Swe-
theosophical mysticism of > Jacob Boehme and the denborg’s “Geisterlehre” (spirit-teaching), defined
Christian kabbalah. There exists a significant typo- reason outright as “Anti-Kabbalah”. In the 18th
logical proximity between some of Boehme’s ideas century the magical elements of Christian Kab-
and those of the kabbalah, yet no direct source of balah, especially — those elements known since >
influence has been identified, neither in Hebrew Pico della Mirandola (1463-94) as cabala practica
nor among the treatises of the Christian kabbalists. (practical Kabbalah) and placed by > Agrippa of
Yet several of Boehme’s disciples and interpreters Nettesheim, in his Philosophia occulta (1533), at
did make use of the Christian kabbalah and inten- the very center of an esoteric philosophy — were
sified the typological connections between the two declared to be a manifestation of “superstition”.
currents. The same applies to the Jewish Enlightenment, the
“Haskalah”, and the “ Wissenschaft des Judentums
Lit.: Gershom Scholem, “Zur Geschichte der Anfange im 19. Jahrhundert”, in which the Kabbalah was
der Christlichen Kabbala”, in: Essays Presented to Leo no less vigorously rejected. There are examples of
Baeck, London, 1954 (revised version in: Kabbalistic
this in the chapter on Kabbalah in the well-known
chrétiens |A. Faivre & FE. Tristan, eds.], Paris: Albin
Michel, 1979, 17-46) @ idem, Kabbalah, New York: Lebensgeschichte (1792-1793) by the Kantian
Dorset, 1974 @ Francois Secret, Le Zohar ches les Salomon Maimon (1753/54-1800), and in the
kabbalistes chrétiens de la Renaissance (1958), repr. Geschichte, Lehre und Meinungen aller bestande-
Paris-The Hague: Mouton & Co. - E.P.H.E., 1964 ¢ nen und noch bestehenden religidsen Sekten der
idem, Les Kabbalistes chrétiens de la Renaissance Juden und der Geheimlehre oder Kabbalah (His-
(1964), repr. Milano/Neuilly-sur-Seine: Arché/Arma
tory, Doctrines and Opinions of all Past and Still
Artis, 1985 @ Chaim Wirszubski, Pico della Miran-
Existing Religious Sects of the Jews and the Secret dola’s Encounter with Jewish Mysticism, Cambridge,
Mass: Harvard University Press, 1989 # Frances Yates, Doctrine or Kabbalah; 1822/23) by Peter Beer
“Giovanni Pico della Mirandola and Magic”, in: (1758-1838). In non-Jewish circles, the criticism of
Lopera e il pensiero di Giovanni Pico della Mirandola “practical Kabbalah” was often combined with
nella storia dell’ Umanesmo, I, Firenze, 1965, 159-203 anti-Semitic arguments. The thesis of the Jews as
@ Joseph Dan (ed.), The Christian Kabbalah: Jewish magicians and of Hebrew as a language of sorcery
Mystical Books and their Christian Interpreters, Cam-
appears in the 18th century in this hostile spirit, for
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1997 @ Alli-
son P. Coudert, Leibniz and the Kabbalah, Dordrecht: instance in Entdecktes Judentum (Jewry Unveiled;
Nijhoff, 1995 @ idem, The Impact of the Kabbalah in 1700) of Johann Andreas Eisenmenger (1654-
the Seventeenth Century: The Life and Thought of 1704) and in Juidische Merckwiirdigkeiten (Jewish
Francis Mercury van Helmont (1614-1698), Leiden/ Curiosa; 1714-17) by Johann Jacob Schudt. The
Boston/Koln: E.J. Brill, 1999 @ Andreas Kilcher, Die lasting influence of these two texts can still be de-
Sprachtheorie der Kabbala als asthetisches Paradigma:
tected in later Romantic writers, such as Clemens
Die Konstruktion einer dsthetischen Kabbala seit der
Brentano (1778-1842), Jacob Grimm (1785-
friithen Neuzeit, Stuttgart/Weimar: J.B. Metzler, 1998
Wilhelm Schmidt-Biggemann (ed.), Christliche Kab- 1836), Achim von Arnim (1781-1831), and Joseph
bala, Ostfildern: Jan Thorbecke Verlag, 2003. von Gorres (1776-1848), who in his Christliche
Mystik (Christian Mysticism; 1836-1842) classed
JOSEPH DAN “Jewish sorcery” as “demonic mysticism”.
But the Enlightenment was not only “anti-Kab-
balah”. Simultaneously with these rejections, the
Jewish Influences IV: Enlightenment/
r8th century brought a multitude of positive per-
Romanticism
ceptions, adoptions, and “rescuings” of Kabbalah
and the Hermetic tradition. The Enlightenment
The interpretation and estimation of Jewish mys-
had two possible ways of rescuing the Kabbalah.
ticism changed fundamentally in the Enlighten-
First, one could think of a philosophical and unhis-
ment. Whereas in the Renaissance Kabbalah had
torical transformation of Hermeticism and Kab-
passed as the model of a rediscovered original
balah, in the course of which their historical,
Christian and esoteric knowledge, and even in the
“positive” manifestation was understood as “pre-
late 17th century (e.g. in > Knorr von Rosenroth,
rational” allegorical language and symbolism that
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz [1646-1716] and >
could be translated into rational notions. This

--- Page 67 ---
643 JEWISH INFLUENCES IV: ENLIGHTENMENT/ROMANTICISM
strategy allowed a rational re-formulation of sonry to the rehabilitation of Kabbalah in the
Hermeticism within the project of a “natural reli- Romantic era. Around 1800, in fact, one can even
gion of reason”. It claimed that reason could be speak of a reintegration of Kabbalah as it had been
distilled, like the hidden quintessence, out of a tra- understood in the early modern era, also in non-
ditional pre-rational context, thereby saving Her- Jewish circles, and had been excluded from the
meticism and Kabbalah for the project of the discourse of reason in the Enlightenment. This
Enlightenment. This approach can be perceived occurred within philosophy on the one hand, and
in attempts to qualify Kabbalah in the histories within literature on the other. For the former, >
of philosophy (from Jacob Brucker to Dietrich Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling (1755-1845),
Tiedemann) and the encyclopedic lexica of the » Franz von Baader (1765-1841) and their circle
Enlightenment (like the Encyclopédie), in which are notable for their integration of Jewish eso-
long chapters or articles on Kabbalah repeatedly tericism in a religious-philosophical sense. Baader
tried — for all their criticism of “practical Kab- occupied himself with Kabbalah from 1796: he
balah” understood as > magic — to recast at least saw it primarily as post-Enlightenment religious
some elements of its metaphysics in philosophical philosophy, as an anti-Kantianism, which he sought
terms. A leading issue in this was the debate over especially in the esoteric Freemasonry launched by
Spinoza’s pantheism, which ever since Spinozismus ~ Saint-Martin. Schelling, again, considered Kab-
im Jtidenthumb (Spinozism in Jewry; 1699) by balah within a philosophy of mythology, as in his
Johann Georg Wachter (1663-1757) had been lecture of 1815, Ueber die Gottheiten von Samoth-
repeatedly explained as a philosophical reformula- rake. He presents it there not merely as an ancient
tion of the Kabbalistic concept of nature and God. “Jewish philosophy”, but as the branch of ‘that pri-
Of course, > Friedrich Christoph Oetinger (1702- mordial system that is the key to all religious sys-
1782) expected much more from a philosophical tems’, thereby making an impressive plea for
rescue of the Kabbalah. In his explanation for the further research into it. Initial attempts at taking up
Offentliches Denkmabhl der Lehr-Tafel der Prinzes- this challenge can be seen in the Protestant theolo-
sin Antonia (Public Monument of the Didactic gian Johann Friedrich von Meyer (1772-1849) -
Tablet of the Princess Antonia; 1763), in the con- i.e. in his periodical Blatter fiir hohere Wahrheit
text of a ‘juxtaposition of Hebrew with contempo- (1819-1832) and his German translation of the
rary philosophy’, he ascribed to the ‘philosophia Sefer Jezirah (1830) —and in particular the Catholic
sacra cabbalistica’ the decisive function of mediat- private scholar Franz Joseph Molitor (1779-1860)
ing between revelation and reason. Oetinger’s Kab- in his four-volume Philosophie der Geschichte
balah was thus part of a Christian theology of the (1827-1854). Collaborating with Jewish scholars
18th century which attempted to set forth ‘die like the Freemason Ephraim Joseph Hirschfeld
Grund-Begriffe Jesu Christi nicht nur ex fide, son- (1755-1820), and basing himself on the religious-
dern auch ex ratione fiir raisonnable’ (the basic philosophical terminology of Schelling and Baader,
concepts of Jesus Christ as reasonably, not only from from ca. 1810-1860 Molitor spent decades study-
the perspective of faith, but also from that of reason). ing original texts in view of making the Kabbalah
The second possibility for a rescue of Jewish mys- available again on the basis of its original sources,
ticism was to place it on an esoteric plane of dis- and of rehabilitating it from a philosophical and
course and explain it as an arcanum, which is what theological point of view. The subtitle of his work
happened in the secret society culture of the En- clarifies the actually Kabbalistic program of this
lightenment. There the esoteric realm of the arca- monumental undertaking in the philosophy of his-
num appeared as a possible residue of esotericism tory: Oder iiber die Tradition in dem alten Bunde
and Kabbalah, but within a discourse that funda- und ihre Beziehung zur Kirche des neuen Bundes.
mentally excluded them. Kabbalah, even if under- Mit vorziiglicher Riicksicht auf die Kabbalah (or:
stood literally as a secret, oral teaching, made its On the tradition in the old covenant and its relation
appearance as the founding myth of a > Free- to the church of the new covenant. With particular
masonry aware of its esoteric elements and reaching reference to the Kabbalah)
back explicitly to the Kabbalah for the explanation Quite distinct from this religious-philosophical
of its symbols. Even more clearly this is the case in treatment of the Kabbalah, the Romantic era wit-
esoteric Freemasonry, especially the Orders of the nessed an aesthetic program, especially in the work
Gold- und Rosenkreuz and the > Asiatic Brethren, of > Novalis (1772-1801) and Friedrich Schlegel
which included in their programs elements of early (1772-1829). Following in the steps of Johann
modern nature-mysticism, as well as Kabbalah. Georg Hamann’s (1730-1788) revaluation of lan-
A direct line leads from this esoteric Freema- guage as such as the “organon of reason”, the

--- Page 68 ---
JEWISH INFLUENCES IV: ENLIGHTENMENT/ROMANTICISM 644
aesthetic Romantics paid most attention to the has been neglected by scholars, with the argument
Kabbalah’s theory of language. Their program was that what passes as “kabbalah” in this context is in
summarized in Friedrich Schlegel’s programmatic fact a “pseudo-kabbalah” unrelated to its original
saying of December 1802: “The true aesthetic is the meaning in Jewish culture. Gershom Scholem, in
Kabbalah’. The philological basis for this configu- particular, has lent his authority to this approach
ration of Kabbalah and aesthetics did not lie in any by dismissing the occultist “kabbalah” of >
direct knowledge of the Jewish sources, and only Eliphas Lévi as ‘brilliant misunderstandings and
selectively in the Christian Kabbalah of the Renais- misrepresentations’, that of > Aleister Crowley as
sance. Knowledge of the Kabbalah came from ‘highly coloured humbug’, and the whole of
secondary sources such as the Enlightenment’s his- occultist interpretations as ‘supreme charlatanism’
tories of philosophy and encyclopaedias, but also (Scholem 1946, 2; 1974, 202-203; 1984, 20).
from the writings of > Giordano Bruno, > Paracel- While the term “charlatanism” is unfortunate, as it
sus, > Robert Fludd, and > Jakob Boehme. The suggests a policy of deliberate deception, it is cer-
aesthetic paradigm of the Kabbalah in Romanti- tainly true that occultist “kabbalah” has only the
cism was a secular reinterpretation of the language- most superficial of connections to original Jewish
theory of early modern Kabbalah. The older kabbalah. However, from a historical perspective
theological, philosophical, and nature-mystical this is not sufficient reason to exclude the phenom-
language-theorems of Christian Kabbalah were enon from historical scrutiny. Scholem himself
understood as aesthetic parameters. The language emphasized “misunderstandings” as an important
of the Kabbalah was no longer seen as a meta- factor of religious innovation in any period (1946,
physical model, but as the paradigm and metaphor 24-25); and the role of “kabbalah” in non-Jewish
of a poetical language. The Kabbalah that was contexts from the Renaissance up to > Romanti-
thus mediated, translated, and reinterpreted can be cism has been seriously studied in spite of the fact
characterized under three aspects: hermeneutics, that already the Christian kabbalah can hardly be
language-mysticism, and language-magic. The Kab- considered “authentic” from a Jewish point of
balistic concept of hermeneutics, as developed in view, not to mention the thoroughly non-Jewish
the literature of Christian Kabbalah, became (as in “esthetic kabbalah” of the Romantics.
Hamann and Schlegel) a stylistics of writing. The The general pattern that characterizes the peri-
early modern projects of a sacred, natural, mathe- ods of Enlightenment and Romanticism is contin-
matical language of Kabbalah came to be seen as ued in the roth century: occultist ideas about
manifestations of a poetic concept of language “kabbalah” reflect no familiarity with Jewish
and knowledge (as in Novalis and Schlegel). And sources but are entirely dependent on second-hand
experiments in language-magic were transposed materials passed on via Christian kabbalistic chan-
(in Novalis, Schlegel, and E.T.A. Hoffmann) to a nels. An exemplary early case is Francis Barrett’s
theory of the magical function of poetical lan- The Magus, or Celestial Intelligencer (1801), whose
guage. This aestheticized Kabbalah of Romantic main sources are > Cornelius Agrippa’s De occulta
aesthetics found considerable resonance in the philosophia libri tres, pseudo-Agrippa’s Fourth
poetry of the modern aesthetic movement. Ele- Book of Occult Philosophy, and pseudo-Abano’s
ments of it are found in the poetry of French Sym- [> Peter of Abano] Heptameron. “Cabala”, under-
bolism, also in many German-Jewish authors circa stood entirely along Agrippean lines, plays a cen-
1900-1933, and again after 1970 in post-struc- tral role in the book, which established for the roth
turalist literary theory. and 2oth centuries a second pattern that would
continue to dominate occultist “kabbalah”: its
Lit.: Andreas B. Kilcher, Die Sprachtheorie der Kab- almost exclusive association with > magic.
balah als dsthetisches Paradigma, Stuttgart: Metzler,
As far as the domain of Western esotericism is
1998 @ Eveline Goodman-Thau, Gert Mattenklott &
concerned, the main exception to both patterns is Christoph Schulte (eds.), Kabbalah und Romantik,
Tubingen: Niemeyer, 1994 ¢ idem, (eds.), Kabbalah und the French philosopher Adolphe Franck (1809-
die Literatur der Romantik, Tibingen: Niemeyer, 1999. 1893). His La Kabbalah ou la Philosophie Reli-
gieuse des Hébreux (1843) was a pioneering
ANDREAS B. KILCHER synthesis based upon serious study of the original
sources. It was widely read and translated, and its
Jewish Influences V: Occultist Kabbalah influence can be discerned not only in the early aca-
demic study of kabbalah, but also in masonic and
The history of kabbalistic influences on roth- occultist authors such as Albert Pike, > Manly P.
and 2oth-century occultism [> occult / occultism] Hall, and > H.P. Blavatsky. This occultist reception

--- Page 69 ---
645 JEWISH INFLUENCES V: OCCULTIST KABBALAH
was no doubt facilitated by the fact that Franck ence cabalistique published as early as 1828], Lévi,
(who also published about > alchemy and > Saint- de Guaita, Marc Haven, -> Sédir, J. Jacob, Sair and
Martin, and a letter of whom to > Papus is pub- Chevalier Drach, and containing a complete trans-
lished in the latter’s La Kabbale of 1892) discussed lation of the Sefer Yetzirah). Papus’ ‘methodical
the Christian kabbalists in some detail, investi- presentation of the kabbalah’ is conspicuous for its
gated the possible relations of kabbalah with > complete absence of any reference to Jewish
Neoplatonism, > gnosticism, and the Chaldaeans sources; instead, we find all the great names of
and Persians, and concluded - wrongly, of course — Christian kabbalah [> Jewish Influences II] com-
that it had very ancient origins traceable to the bined with other esoteric and occultist authors
Zoroastrianism of the Persian magi. All this could including > John Dee, > Fabre d’Olivet, > Saint-
serve to confirm occultist perceptions of kabbalah Martin, » Lacuria, > Hoéné Wronski, > Ragon de
as a mysterious “ancient wisdom” that held the key Bettignies, > Saint-Yves d’Alveydre, > Barlet, and
to magic and the occult. + de Guaita.
Eliphas Lévi was the first to develop such a per- The ideas of French occultist kabbalah were
spective at length, in all the major works of his made available to an English readership originally
occultist period (but for a short summary, see his by fringe-masonic authors such as Albert Pike and
“Elements of the kabbalah in ten lessons”, pub- Kenneth Mackenzie. Pike’s Morals and Dogmas of
lished in Le livre des splendeurs and several times the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freema-
reprinted, inter alia by Papus in the second edition sonry (1871) is full of references to kabbalah,
of his book quoted above). He was almost com- dependent on Franck, Lévi (whose writings are
pletely ignorant of Hebrew, resulting in spectacular plundered without acknowledgement) and >
blunders (Secret 1988), and his ideas about kab- Knorr von Rosenroth’s Kabbalah Denudata.
balah are wildly fantastic; but the important point Mackenzie is likewise strongly dependent on Lévi,
is that they were taken seriously by generations of whom he had visited in Paris; in his famous Royal
occultists after him. Taking his cue from > Court Masonic Cyclopaedia (1875-1877) he devoted a
de Gébelin and > Etteila, Lévi closely associates the long article to kabbalah and a shorter one to the
kabbalah with the > Tarot, arguing that its twenty- Sefer Yetzirah, thus forging another link in the
two “great arcana” correspond with the twenty- occultist-kabbalistic chain.
two letters of the Hebrew alphabet and the — H.P. Blavatsky refers to kabbalah in many
twenty-two “paths” linking the sefirot in the “tree parts of her writings, and once again her interpre-
of life” diagram; to these are added the numbers tations are shot through with errors and misunder-
one to ten that are basic in traditional > Number standings. Important is her reference on the very
Symbolism and are associated with the ten sefirot. first page of Isis Unveiled to a mysterious ‘old
The result is a system of > correspondences based Book’ of which only one copy has survived, and
upon thirty-two “paths”, presented by Lévi as a from which ‘the most ancient Hebrew document
universal system of classification that contains the on occult learning — the Siphra Dzeniouta’ is said to
totality of human knowledge. Specific insights can be compiled. Vol. II, ch. V is devoted to “Mysteries
be deduced from this system, or so it is claimed, by of the Kabala” and further confirms that Blavatsky
means of the kabbalistic methods (actually stan- saw the kabbalah as dependent on more ancient
dard methods of exegesis in Judaism) of gematria traditions, Hinduism in particular; indeed, she
and temurah. It might be added that Lévi sees not states quite bluntly that “The ten Sephiroth are
only the great ancient and oriental religions, but copies taken from the ten Pradjapatis created by
Roman Catholicism as well, as ‘completely kabbal- Viradj’ (Isis I], 215). Apart from earlier French
istic’; but the priests have lost the key that could occultist authors, Blavatsky seems to have been
unlock the true nature of their cult. dependent mostly on Knorr von Rosenroth’s Kab-
Lévi’s ideas have had a great influence on the balah denudata, which contains the Sifra Di-
later development of French occultism, as reflected Tseniuta alluded to on her first page (see Scholem
e.g. in the foundation of organizations with titles 1946, 398-399 nt 2; Hanegraaff 1996/1998, 453).
such as “Rose-Croix kabbalistique” (founded in In her chapter on kabbalah she is interested mostly
1887 by ~ Stanislas de Guaita and > Joséphin in the concept of En-Soph and the system of the
Péladan). Fully characteristic for the later French sefirot, and most of her references are to the
perspective is the book by Papus, already men- Zohar; but most conspicuous about the chapter is
tioned above, which appeared in 1892 and was re- the fact that, in spite of its title, large parts are not
published in 1903 in a much expanded edition actually about kabbalah but about the ancient and
(with new contributions by Lenain [author of a Sci- oriental religions from which its fundamental ideas

--- Page 70 ---
JEWISH INFLUENCES V: OCCULTIST KABBALAH 646
are said to be derived. It ends, not surprisingly, with philology, and his ignorance of Hebrew and Ara-
one of her vehement polemics against Christian maic, but states that he is nevertheless one of the
theologians. few contemporary authors whose work is “distin-
Of particular importance for the development of guished by real insight into the world of Kabbal-
occultist kabbalah is the > Hermetic Order of the ism’ (Scholem 1946, 2, 212).
Golden Dawn. Two of its founders were instru- No such thing could be said about the kabbalism
mental in “translating” kabbalistic texts into Eng- of two other central authors in the Golden Dawn
lish and writing popular books about the subject. lineage, > Aleister Crowley and > Dion Fortune.
+> William Wynn Westcott’s Sefer Yetzirah (1887) Crowley’s Liber 777 is presented by his editor
was derived from Pistorius’ edition (Artes Cabalis- Israel Regardie as ‘a qabalistic dictionary of cere-
ticae, 1587), and in 1894 he also published a trans- monial magic, oriental mysticism, comparative
lation of an alchemical-kabbalistic text called mysticism and symbology’; it consists largely of
Aesch Metzareff, taken from Knorr von Rosen- long tables of correspondences, many of which
roth’s Kabbalah denudata. ~ Samuel MacGregor make heavy use of Hebrew and kabbalistic terms.
Mathers’ Kabbalah Unveiled (1887) contains some Crowley’s other kabbalistic writings, published in
parts of the Zohar: the Sifra DiTseniuta already his journal Equinox and re-edited by Regardie
referred to by Blavatsky (see above), the Idra together with Liber 777, confirm that for him
Rabba and the Idra Sutha. These annotated trans- the term kabbalah was more or less synonymous
lations and discussions, questionable though they with “tabulation of knowledge” as such. Hence it
are from a scholarly point of view, are essential to should not surprise that as the ‘principal sources’ of
occultist kabbalah as it developed into the 2oth his tables he does not mention any Jewish or even
century. A central role in the Golden Dawn tradi- Christian kabbalistic author at all, but instead lists
tion in this regard is played by the sefirotic “tree of ‘Pietro di Abano, Lilly, Eliphaz Levi, Sir R. Burton,
life”, understood as a system of correspondences Swami Vivekananda, the Hindu Buddhist, and
that can be used not only to understand the struc- Chinese Classics, the Quran and its commentators,
ture of the universe but also as a basic tool for the Book of the Dead, and, in particular, original
magical/spiritual practice. One typical ritual, for research’ (Regardie 1977, Book Two, xi).
example, as transmitted by Israel Regardie in his Dion Fortune’s The Mystical Oabalah (1935) is
edition of the Golden Dawn rituals, requires the a classic of 2oth-century occultism, and one of the
operator to stand in front of a man-high picture of clearest overviews of what kabbalah means in that
the tree, and imagine how ‘the universal energy’ context. Fortune is well aware of how strongly her
flows down from sefirot to sefirot and thus through system differs from Jewish kabbalah: ‘I do not say,
all the corresponding parts of his own body; this This is the teaching of the ancient Rabbis; rather do
practice can be expanded e.g. by making use of the I say, This is the practice of the modern Qabalists’
sounds and colours that are believed to correspond (Fortune 1984, 2, 20). It may well be that ‘the
to each of the sefirot. One sees here how the ancient Rabbis knew nothing of some of the con-
sefirotic system is put to entirely new uses in the cepts here set forth’, but although Fortune wel-
context of a strongly psychologized spirituality. comes corrections regarding historical accuracy, in
Typical of the Golden Dawn approach and its later the end, she says, ‘I do not care a jot for the author-
derivations is that “kabbalah” is almost com- ity of tradition if it hampers the free development
pletely reduced to the symbolism of the Tree. of a system of such practical value as the Holy
All forms of “kabbalistic magic” in the 2oth-cen- Qabalah’ (0.c., 9-20): a pragmatic attitude that
tury are heavily dependent on the foundational makes her book perfect for the modern spiritual
writings of Westcott and Mathers, but each of the market in a > New Age context. Fortune’s modern
important authors in the tradition have their own kabbalah is presented as ‘the Yoga of the West’,
emphases. > Arthur Edward Waite, with his Doc- and focuses entirely on the kabbalistic “Tree of
trine and Literature of the Kabbalah (1902) and Life”: ‘the best meditation-symbol we possess’
The Secret Doctrine in Israel (1913; combined in (o.c., 2). In elucidating the Tree as a ‘compendium
The Holy Kabbalah published in 1929), must be of science, psychology, philosophy, and theology’,
mentioned in this context, although his compara- she explicitly places herself in the tradition of
tively scholarly and historical approach — which Crowley, Westcott, Mathers and Waite (0.c., 13,
earned him the respect even of Gershom Scholem — 22). The Mystical Qabalah discusses in detail each
makes him a case apart. Scholem deplores his of the ten sefirot and its correspondences, with
uncritical attitude towards facts of history and their practical applications for meditation and spir-

--- Page 71 ---
647 JEWISH INFLUENCES V: OCCULTIST KABBALAH
itual development, on the basis of Crowley’s 777. kind of applied psychology. That magical practice
Again Fortune is quite clear about her Western- in this context has increasingly come to be under-
esoteric and occultist rather than Jewish sources: stood in psychological terms as focused on spiritual
she mentions Plotinus, Dee, Agrippa, > Llull, Peter self-development is a fact that makes occultist kab-
of Abano, Knorr von Rosenroth, Westcott, Lévi, balah congenial to the popular New Age market.
Mary Anne Atwood, Blavatsky, > Anna Kings-
ford, Mabel Collins, Papus, Saint-Martin, Gerald Francis Barrett, The Magus, or Celestial Intelligencer;
being a Complete System of Occult Philosophy (1801),Massey, > G.R.S. Mead, but also James Frazer,
Boston/York Beach: Weiserbooks, 2000 # Dion For-
Wallis Budge, > Carl Gustav Jung, Sigmund Freud,
tune, The Mystical OQabalah (1935), York Beach:
the Sacred Books of the East series, the Loeb classi- Samuel Weiser, 1984 # Adolphe Franck, La Kabbalah
cal library and, finally, the Bible and the Soncino ou la Philosophie Religieuse des Hébreux (1843),
Press edition of the Zohar (0.c., 104-105). For- Paris: Hachette, 1889 @ Eliphas Lévi, The Book of
tune’s work can indeed be seen as the culmina- Splendours: The Inner Mysteries of Oabalism (French
tion of a trend that could already be perceived in orig. 1894), Wellingborough/New York: Aquarian
Press/Samuel Weiser, 1973 @ S.L. MacGregor Mathers,
Lévi: the understanding of “kabbalah” as a cross-
The Kabbalah Unveiled (1887), New York: Samuel
cultural analytical tool on esoteric and occultist Weiser, 1968 and many reprints @ Papus, La Cabbale
foundations. As such, it perfectly exemplifies God- (1892), sec. ed., Paris: Chacornac, 1903 Charles
win’s analysis of occultism as a species of “com- Poncé, Kabbalah: An Introduction and Illumination
parative religion” (Godwin 1994). for the World Today (1973), Wheaton: Theosophical
This comparative-religions approach to kab- Publishing House, 1997 @ Israel Regardie. (ed.), 777
balah is also evident in some other popular authors and Other Qabalistic Writings of Aleister Crowley,
Including Gematria & Sepher Sephiroth (1973), York
who do not directly represent the Golden Dawn
Beach: Samuel Weiser, 1977 @ idem, A Garden of
tradition, such as Charles Poncé and Leo Schaya. Pomegranates (orig. 1932), St. Paul: Llewyllyn, 1999
Poncé is an author with strong Jungian leanings Leo Schaya, The Universal Meaning of the Kabbalah
[> Jungism]; referring to scholars like Scholem and (French orig. 1958), London: George Allen & Unwin,
Tishby as well as to the well-known occultist 1971 @ Arthur Edward Waite, The Holy Kabbalah
authors discussed above, he compares Jewish kab- (1929), New Hyde Park: University Books, 1960 @
William Wynn Westcott, Sepher Yetzirah: The Book of
balah with oriental religious systems such as Yoga,
Formation and the Thirty-Two Paths of Wisdom
Tibetan Buddhism and Tantra. Schaya approaches
(1887), Edmonds: Holmes 1996 @ idem, Aesch Meza-
kabbalah from the perspective of Traditionalism reph, or the Purifying Fire (1894), Edmonds: Holmes,
[> Tradition]: he believes that the premises of kab- 1996 @ idem, An Introduction to the Study of the
balah ‘are those of esotericism or metaphysics in Kabalah (1910), repr. Kila: Kessinger, n.d. ¢ idem, The
general’ and points out that in his book he ‘has Kabbalah of the Golden Dawn, Edmonds: Holmes
undertaken to rediscover in Judaism the philo- 1997.
sophia perennis that he learned through the Hindu,
Lit.: Alison Butler, “Beyond Attribution: The Impor-
Buddhist and Sufi traditions’ (1971, 7, 10). tance of Barrett’s Magus”, Journal for the Academic
In the wake of the central authors discussed Study of Magic 1 (2003), 7-32 @ Joscelyn Godwin, The
above, a plethora of popular books have been pub- Theosophical Enlightenment, Albany: SUNY Press,
lished during the later 2oth century that embroider 1994 @ Wouter J. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and
upon their basic ideas and approaches and cater to Western Culture: Esotericism in the Mirror of Secular
Thought, Leiden, etc.: E.J. Brill, 1996/Albany: SUNYthe magical-occultist subculture within a general
Press, 1998, 453 @ J.-H. Laenen, Joodse mystiek: Een
“New Age” framework. Among the many authors
inleiding, Kampen/Tielt: Kok/Lannoo, 1998, 274-284
in this context some of the better known are Israel @ Charles Mopsik, “Quelques remarques sur Adolphe
Regardie, Frater Achad (Charles Stansfield Jones), Franck, philosophe frangais et pionnier de |’étude de la
Pat Zalewski, and John Michael Greer, but any cabale au XX° siécle”, Pardés, autumn 1994, 239-244
such selection is somewhat arbitrary since new @ Gershom Scholem, Major Trends in Jewish Mysti-
books rehashing the same basic approaches keep cism, New York: Schocken, 1946, 2, 398-399 @ idem,
Kabbalah, New York: Dorset, 1974, 202-203 @ idem,
appearing. All of them share the basic perspec-
“Alchemie und Kabbala”, in: idem, Judaica 4, Frank-
tives outlined above: they espouse a universalist furt a.M.: Suhrkamp, 1984, 19-128, esp. 20-23 @
rather than specifically Jewish or Christian under- Francois Secret, “Eliphas Levi et la kabbale”, Charis:
standing of kabbalah, interpreted as a system of Archives de l’Unicorne i (1988), 81-89.
correspondences according to the model of the
sefirotic “Tree of Life”, and are focused on practi- WOUTER J. HANEGRAAFF
cal “magical” application — which often means a

--- Page 72 ---
JUNG 648
Jung, Carl Gustav, * 26.7.1875 Kesswil Africa, Egypt, India, Ceylon), and acted as a cul-
tural mediator, thanks to his excellent knowledge(Switzerland), t 6.6.1961 Zurich
of Asiatic philosophies and religions (Hinduism,
1. BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 2. TRADITIONS Buddhism, Taoism), which he helped to make
AND CONTEXTS 3. SEVEN SERMONS TO known in Europe — for which he was rewarded by
THE DEAD (1916) 4. DEPTH PSYCHOLOGY honorary doctorates by three Indian universities.
AND INITIATION 5. JUNG, INTERPRETER His correspondence with men and women all over
OF THE WESTERN ESOTERIC TRADITION the world, specialists in various fields or unknown,
6. ESOTERICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY OF on psychological, cultural, or topical subjects
RELIGION 7. ESOTERICISM AND CRITICISM shows the lively character of a mind in ceaseless
OF MODERNITY 8. RECEPTION AND evolution and constantly seeking engagement with
POSTERITY its own time. The intercultural openness of his
work — contemporaneous with the great theories of
1. BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH modern ethnology, whose discoveries it took into
The Swiss psychiatrist and psychologist Jung, account — determined Jung’s concepts as he sought
son of a Zwinglian pastor, grew up in an environ- to show the existence of links between all civiliza-
ment profoundly marked by religion. After medical tions through study of their myths and images.
studies at the University of Basle and a doctoral Open to dialogue with the most varied disciplines —
thesis in psychiatry devoted to the psychology and he participated regularly at the meetings of the Era-
pathology of occult phenomena (1902), he prac- nos circle from 1933 onwards — Jung was also one
ticed psychiatry at the Burgholzli Clinic (Zurich) of the founders of transdisciplinary thought.
as assistant to Eugen Bleuler (1857-1939). He dis-
covered the early theories of Freud (1856-1939), of 2. TRADITIONS AND CONTEXTS
whom he became one of the closest disciples from Jung was interested in all forms of the mystical,
1907 until 1913, when he left Freud to found his gnostic, and esoteric tradition, whether historical
own development of psychoanalysis, Analytical or contemporary, European or non-European, and
Psychology. The scope of his work and the extent this interest profoundly marked his thought and his
of his knowledge make Jung one of the greatest anthropology. His first works arose in the context
figures of Western esotericism in the 2oth century; of the infatuation with the occult sciences in
and he also had, by his own account, a personal Europe and the United States at the end of the rgth
experience of occult [> occult / occultism] and and beginning of the zoth century, as it manifested
paranormal phenomena. He relates some of these both in the writings of esotericists and Theo-
experiences, including the most impressive ones, in sophists (> H.P. Blavatsky, > Rudolf Steiner) —
the account of his life, Erinmnerungen, Traume, from whom Jung, incidentally, tried to dissociate
Gedanken (Memories, dreams, reflections, 1961). himself — and in literature (~ Gustav Meyrink,
This “interior autobiography” reveals the impor- Hermann Hesse [1877-1962], Robert Musil [18 80-
tance of the esoteric paradigm for his life and work; 1942]). Whereas Freud had based his approach to
it ascribes capital importance to all the paranor- the psyche on the rejection of the “muddy tide of
mal phenomena, as well as to dreams, notably in occultism”, Jung accepted the challenge of the irra-
their premonitory dimension. Settled beside Lake tional up to the limit, and conceived of his own
Zirich, where he headed a school with the col- approach as the prolongation of that tradition. He
laboration of several disciples, mostly women came to know it partly through his lifelong reading
(Jolande Jacobi, Aniela Jaffé, Marie-Louise von of esoteric texts of all ages and cultures, and partly
Franz), Jung divided his time between therapeutic in second-hand fashion as handed on in > Goethe’s
work and the writing of long books on the psy- work (principally in Faust) and in German Roman-
chology of the individual, that of cultures, and the tic psychology (> Gotthilf Heinrich Schubert, Carl
hermeneutics of religions — all subjects in which Gustav Carus [1789-1869]), which had already
the relation to esotericism was decisive for him. The integrated elements of ~ Paracelsianism and
paintings he made on the walls of his second home, Boehmian theosophy [> Jacob Boehme; > Christ-
the “Tower” at Bollingen, where he retired with ian Theosophy]. Jung’s entire oeuvre, from his first
increasing frequency from 1923 onwards, bear wit- researches into ~ spiritualism at the turn of the
ness to the place occupied by esotericism in Jung’s century up to the writings of the 1940s and 1950s
personal imagination. A great traveler, between on > gnosticism, > alchemy, and oriental reli-
1920 and 1940 he explored various non-European gions, related directly to the problems treated by
civilizations (North Africa, New Mexico, Central esotericism. In his doctoral thesis (1902), devoted

--- Page 73 ---
649 JUNG
to paranormal events and more especially to medi- of initiation, which may succeed or fail. Psycho-
umism, Jung interpreted the spiritualist phenom- logical Types (1921) develops the ideas of polarity
ena as exteriorizations of autonomous complexes and quaternity which would be at the base of all
of the unconscious. Towards the end of his life he Jung’s later work, as well as those of unity and
authored many essays on the psychological signi- totality, from which he made categories for the
ficance of various occult sciences (> astrology, description of the psyche. Thereafter Jung’s clinica]
alchemy) and of divinatory phenomena (such as work appealed ever more explicitly to notions bor-
the I-Ching). References to the texts of various eso- rowed from esoteric traditions, to the extent of
teric traditions are scattered throughout his works. devoting some of his studies to one or another of
This interest continually lighted on new objects, these, such as alchemy. He developed a model
with the result that Jung’s work touched on almost of the psyche which conceived of it as a polarity,
all the fields and all the epochs of the esoteric tra- making room for a spiritual pole as well as an
dition. His correspondence, as well as the many impulsive pole. The originality of Jung’s views
volumes of his seminars (e.g. those devoted to a appears above all in his theory of the archetypes,
series of visions from one of his patients, or to developed during the 19208-19408, which also
Nietzsche’s Zarathustra), bear witness to the same explains his concept of the unconscious. The latter
preoccupation. was first based on a rupture with the Freudian view
that the unconscious is a product of repression: for
3. SEVEN SERMONS TO THE DEAD Jung, the unconscious, like the “poetic” universe of
(1916) the German Romantics, possessed a reality that is
One of Jung’s first works that displays most autonomous and anterior to consciousness. Fol-
vividly his privileged relationship with esotericism lowing the romantic concepts of the unconscious
is Septem sermones ad mortuos (Seven sermons to (such as Carl Gustav Carus expounded) and the
the dead, 1916), a text of poetic character that bor- “philosophy of the unconscious” of Eduard von
rows the language of gnosticism (the principal Hartmann (1842-1906), Jung held that the un-
speaker is > Basilides of Alexandria). This text- conscious psyche is “collective”, common to all
program, unique in its genre among the published humanity or at least to some of its groupings. Its
works of Jung, sets forth an esoteric anthropology, contents are structured in “primordial images” (the
cosmology, and theology, and calls upon various “archetypes”, a notion which he owed to Plato, to
gnostic images (the Pleroma, the god Abraxas as + Augustine, and also to Kant), which appear in
demiurge), but also on elements borrowed from dreams and in the products of the imagination, and
different oriental and European traditions, notably also find resonances in individual existence by way
from Jacob Boehme’s thought, such as the myth of the major existential experiences. The experi-
of Sophia and the status of the principle of evil ence of the unconscious leads the subject to live
(Lucifer). Typical of Jung’s eclecticism, the Ser- through the confrontation with evil, with his own
mons present in cryptic form the ensemble of interior negativity (archetype of the “shadow”),
themes which would structure both his clinical that of the Other in its gendered dimension (“ani-
work and his religious thought. In the same vein mus” for the woman, “anima” for the man), and
were his private journals written during these years finally — as a consequence of the preceding — that of
(the “Black Book” and the “Red Book”, 1913- the potential totality of the individual subject
1916), to which he consigned his inner experience, (archetype of the “Self”). This model of the uncon-
notably the dialogue with his “inner master” scious also modifies the status granted to dreams. A
whom he christened Philemon. These texts from dream does not merely reveal desire, but brings to
the first period of Jung’s work constituted the eso- light the other face of the dreamer’s conscious situ-
teric facet of his thought, of which the clinical and ation, thus taking on a compensatory value, even a
hermeneutic works were therefore the exotericism. prospective one heralding evolutions to come. The
question posed is thus no longer that of the origin
4. DEPTH PSYCHOLOGY AND of the dream, but that of its function, the uncon-
INITIATION scious intention that it reveals: Jung substituted for
Jung’s first post-Freudian work, Transforma- a causal interpretation of dreams a final or teleo-
tions and Symbols ofthe Libido (1911-1912) drew logical interpretation. He moreover distinguished a
on mythological images to comment on and inter- category of dreams that do not refer to an individ-
pret the fantasies of a young schizophrenic, called ual situation alone, but to the collective plane, and
Miss Miller. The idea was sketched out there that which thus have a “prophetic” status (such as those
psychological evolution is structured as a process which he himself had at the eve of World War I).

--- Page 74 ---
JUNG 650
Jung’s anchoring in an esoteric tradition is on which Jung was one of the first to conduct a sta-
equally evident in the status he accorded to the tistical inquest. His study on the I-Ching (1950)
products of the > imagination. Unlike Freud, for sought to explain the functioning of divination by
whom the phantasy always has a sexual sig- basing it on the interaction between the psyche of
nificance, Jung conceived of a creative imagination, the person questioning the oracle and the objective
a mediating faculty between man and the sense- situation. Jung’s last great works (including Mys-
world (the divine world of the Hermetic tradition). terium coniunctionis, 1955/1956) developed these
He developed the therapeutic method of “active concepts within a vaster framework, postulating a
imagination”, which posits that the patient, unity of the world, an unus mundus whose differ-
through creative work on the symbols brought up ent levels of reality are articulated with one another
by his unconscious, can work the transmutation of and, due to the “psychoid” character of the uni-
the latter’s contents, thus increasing his conscious- verse, able to intercommunicate. Jung thus tried to
ness and arriving at a cure. The cure of neurosis, bring about a meeting between the Hermetic world
defined as the “suffering of a soul which has not view and that of the scientific revolutions of his
found its destination”, is presented as a process of time. His fruitful dialogue with Wolfgang Pauli
initiation, in the course of which the subject stops (1900-1958), Nobel prizewinner in physics, with
identifying himself unilaterally with conscious whom he published The Interpretation of Nature
positions and comes little by little to integrate and the Psyche (1950), allowed him to integrate
unconscious elements. This process, which Jung into his vision of man and the world the new per-
styled “individuation” or “self-becoming” (Selbst- spectives offered by quantum mechanics.
werdung), is a modern equivalent of the initiatic Thus, if one follows the criteria established by
path, and Jung himself called it “mystical”. Coher- Antoine Faivre (Access to Western Esotericism,
ently with these ideas, Jung offered a view of the 1994) to judge whether an oeuvre belongs to the
subject derived from mystical concepts, and con- field of esotericism, one must admit that the work
ceived, beside the I (Ich, ego), of another pole of the of Jung satisfies several of the requisite criteria: it is
subject, the Self (Selbst), which is the potential based on the idea of “correspondence” between the
totality of the subject who has integrated the great and small world; on that of a mediation
unconscious. This representation of the Self, thus through the imagination, the creative faculty; on
named after the dtman of the Upanishads, to which that of “transmutation” or the transformation of
Jung explicitly referred, is one of the proofs that, the individual! through work on the materia prima
however important his anchorage in the Western of the unconscious contents; one may add the idea
tradition, his ideas were nonetheless profoundly of a “second birth” of the person, attaining a new
indebted to Eastern models. identity at the close of an initiatic process. Jung, to
Jung’s psychology thus expounded all the themes be sure, established a special relationship with this
of an esoteric anthropology. But his work went tradition that was not merely allegiance to one of
beyond the plane of mere individual psychology to its forms, but an integrating synthesis, seeking the
offer, from the 1940s onward, a vision of reality connection between its different and particular
just as firmly founded on esoteric concepts. His forms. Moreover, through his rooting in a scientific
hypothesis of synchronicity (1952) examined the discipline — psychology and psychiatry — he offered
phenomena of coincidence, apparently due to an interpretative viewpoint on the discourse be-
chance, and explained them through the action of tween the various forms of traditional knowledge.
a principle of acausal relationship, which gives a
meaning to this chance. This theory, which may be 5. JUNG, INTERPRETER OF THE
considered a modern version of the doctrine of > WESTERN ESOTERIC TRADITION
correspondences, sees an analogical relationship Parallel with this building of psychological theo-
between the human microcosm and the macrocosm ries on esoteric foundations, Jung also worked as a
of the universe, thanks to which such manifesta- cultural interpreter, suggesting interpretations of
tions of the unconscious are possible in the objec- various currents of Western esotericism that he
tive sphere. Such “significant chances” are thought wanted to restore to their former place in European
to be produced spontaneously in situations with a cultural history. Without completely abandoning
strong emotional charge, capable of allowing the the territory of occultism and spiritualism, he
contents of the unconscious to emerge. They are devoted studies to gnosticism (Aion, 1951), to
also at the base of the phenomena of divination [> astrology and alchemy, and to their relationship
Divinatory Arts], as also of astrological prediction, with modern science. His project was thus to sug-

--- Page 75 ---
651 JUNG
gest a reading of the hidden face of Western culture, transferential situation, the analyst and the patient
at the same time as discovering his own presuppo- find themselves in the position of the adept and the
sitions in history. soror mystica working together at the realization
Within the body of esoteric learning entered on of the opus, i.e. to the extension of consciousness
by Jung, it was alchemy that held the most impor- and the realization of the Self.
tant place. Jung devoted several thousand pages to
the Western alchemical tradition and to some of its 6. ESOTERICISM AND PSYCHOLOGY
principal representatives (> Paracelsus, Gérard OF RELIGION
Dorn), and wrote detailed commentaries on some This project of the hermeneutics of culture
of them, such as the Rosarium philosophorum. An caused Jung to have a lifelong interest in religious
initial study on a Chinese alchemical text (Com- phenomena and to seek out dialogue with theolo-
mentary on the Secret of the Golden Flower, 1929) gians, both Protestant and Catholic, and with his-
was followed by an essay on the psychological torians of religion. The stature he accorded to
interpretation of alchemy (Psychology and AIl- religious people makes of his oeuvre one of the
chemy, 1944), then by a group of studies of a major works of the zoth-century psychology of
central symbol of the alchemical tradition, the religion. Going beyond the projectional character
coniunctio (Mysterium coniunctionis, 1955/1956). of every representation of the divine, as conceived
Among the numerous alchemists whose texts Jung by Feuerbach (1804-1872), beyond Nietzsche’s
commented on, Paracelsus held the first place. Jung “death of God”, and the idea of a “self-destruction
devoted to him and his disciple Gérard Dorn two of Christianity” as announced by Eduard von
long studies (1940 and 1942), which contributed Hartmann, Jung proposed an approach to the reli-
to making known the work of the Swiss physician- gious phenomenon that assumed a position beyond
philosopher: there are expounded the bases of both its devaluation and the unconditional em-
Paracelsian thought; his philosophy of nature; the brace of dogma. Convinced of the existence of a
theory of the two “lights”, that of nature and that “religious impulse” in the human psyche, he wrote
of the Holy Spirit; the elements and principles at many studies on religious subjects and underlined
work in nature and in transformation, like the the importance of heterodox currents, from gnosti-
archaeus. Jung saw in Paracelsus’s work the im- cism to ~ mysticism. Carefully distinguishing
plicit formulation of a discourse on the uncon- “confession” from “religion”, he proposed a
scious, and this decisive encounter with one of the definition of the religious attitude as ‘scrupulous
prime representatives of Hermeticism and the phi- attention paid to the manifestations of the irra-
losophy of nature led Jung on to an interest in tional’ (Psychology and Religion, 1940), and urged
alchemy as a para-scientific discourse, as a spiritual the necessity of a “symbolic” life that takes the
phenomenon, and as a religious discourse. These “numinous” factors (Rudolf Otto’s term) into
studies allowed Jung to shed light on the represen- account as bearers of meaning, and restores the
tations of one of the most enigmatic disciples of dimension of the sacred to individual existence.
arcana, and to illuminate certain processes at work Although he recognized the importance of the
in the psyche by analyzing them through alchemi- Christian roots of Western civilization, Jung, as a
cal representations. The three principles (sulfur, great reader of Meister Eckhart and > Jacob
mercury, salt) and the phases of the opus (nigredo, Boehme, undertook a critical revision of certain
albedo, rubedo) are interpreted as states of the Christian dogmas in the light of mystical and eso-
psyche, or as moments of confrontation between teric ideas. His essay on the dogma of the Trinity
consciousness and the unconscious. As for the (1940) reflected on the exclusion of the feminine
philosophers’ stone, it is a symbol of the Self, the from the Christian representation of the divine,
realized state of the subject after transmutation. and juxtaposed this with a group of heterodox doc-
The alchemists, Jung maintained, sought by work- trines which, from the Gnostics to Boehme, sanc-
ing on matter to give expression to modifications of tioned the reintegration of the feminine. As a
consciousness, and to the tendency of the psyche parallel to the mother archetype (of which the Vir-
towards the state of wholeness. The recourse to gin and Divine Mother is an aspect), Jung placed
alchemy as a metaphorical discourse allowed Jung the figure of Sophia or Divine Wisdom, archetype
to formulate the final state of his theory and to of feminine spirituality. These studies on the reli-
explain precisely his concept of the analytic cure gious representations of the feminine went together
and the phenomenon of transference (Psychology with a validation of the feminine on the psycholog-
of the Transference, 1946), postulating that in the ical and cultural levels. Referring to Joachim of

--- Page 76 ---
JUNG 652
Fiori (t 1201) and his tripartite vision of history, National Socialism (Wotan, 1936). The originality
Jung went further by conceiving of the Trinity on a of his analysis lay in seeking the origin of these phe-
progressive model: the Holy Spirit here corre- nomena in the collective unconscious. The critical
sponds to the third stage of the manifestation of view of modernity, often present in the writings of
the divine, in which the opposites constituted by esotericists at the beginning of the zoth century
the reigns of the Father and the Son reunite in a (thus, in very different ways, in both > Rudolf
coniunctio. Steiner and - René Guénon), was no less so in the
Jung’s work in religious psychology also in- work of Jung, who warned that the danger of mass-
cluded a reflection on the question of evil and its movements increases as secularization grows, if
origin, expressed mainly in his correspondence outdated religious values are not replaced by other
with the Jesuit Victor White. Answer to Job (1952), forms of access to meaning. The solution to this
containing Jung’s debate with the Judeo-Christian conflict is possible, Jung thought, through “indi-
conception of God, was his most important contri- viduation”, in which the evolution of the subject
bution to this problem. Commenting on the Book towards greater consciousness allows him to
of Job, Jung pointed out the ambivalence inherent acquire personal convictions about the meaning of
in the divine imago of the Old Testament and the existence, and enables him to resist contamination
problem of the “divine unconscious”. He ques- by “psychic epidemics”.
tioned the identification of God with goodness, and
reintegrated evil within the divine sphere. Jung saw 8. RECEPTION AND POSTERITY
in the 20th century the end of a world and the pas- For all these reasons, Jung’s oeuvre holds an emi-
sage to a new stage of religious evolution, which nent and unique place in the field of zoth-century
he called a “new aeon”. In view of this vision- esotericism. At the same time, it marks a turning-
ary dimension, and in view of the theme of a spiri- point in the history of esoteric doctrines, insofar as
tualization of matter (alchemy!), Jung’s religious it offers an innovative approach to them limited
thought might be seen as comparable with that of neither to pure erudite study, nor to the adhesion to
his contemporary Pierre Teilhard de Chardin some institutionalized current. This position earned
(1881-1955). Jung saw the great currents of Jung criticism both from the detractors of esoteri-
Christian esotericism as being in a compensatory cism and from its adepts. Although contested by
relationship to institutional Christianity and its the perennialists [> Tradition], who are often
dogmatism. His interest in gnosticism, present ever opposed to psychoanalysis, Jung was still one of
since the Seven Sermons to the Dead, reappeared in the contemporary authors who possessed the
his works of the 1950s (Aion, 1951), especially widest knowledge of esoteric currents of the mod-
with commentaries on ~ Zosimos of Panopolis. ern West. His work contributed to the bringing to
Jung’s oeuvre equally made room for oriental eso- light of a Western “path” and its specific nature.
tericism, with his studies on Chinese alchemy Beyond the various trends of analytical psychology
(1929), the Tibetan Book of the Dead (1935), the and the post-Jungian currents that developed after
Tibetan Book of the Great Liberation (1955) and his death, he was of capital importance for the field
the I-Ching (1950). In these studies, conceived as of researches into the imagination and the mythic
“psychological commentaries”, Jung attempted to in culture and society (G. Durand, M. Maffesoli,
demonstrate both the differences and the similari- J.J. Wunenburger), for the dialogue between reli-
ties of archetypal representations in the East and gions (M. Eliade), and for studies of the “two cul-
the West, thus posing on a fresh basis the question tures”, that of the humanities and that of the exact
of a universal esotericism and its invariable fea- sciences, and their integration within a transdisci-
tures. His own oeuvre, heir to both Eastern and plinary perspective (E. Morin, B. Nicolescu). In its
Western influences, was largely founded on the popular form, Jung’s thought is also claimed as a
idea of a synthesis between the two traditions, or at foundation of the > New Age movement.
least on that of their dialogue.
Carl Gustav Jung, Zur Psychologie und Pathologie
7. ESOTERICISM AND CRITICISM OF sogenannter okkulter Phanomene (1902), in: Gesam-
MODERNITY melte Werke, Walter-Verlag: Olten/Freiburg im Breis-
One part of Jung’s work was dedicated to collec- gau (henceforth G.W.), vol. 1: Psychiatrische Studien
(1966) @ Psychologische Typen (1921), G.W. 6 (1960)
tive psychic phenomena and their repercussions in
¢@ Das Geheimnis der Goldenen Bliite (1929) — Die
the political sphere and in social life, thus to fanati- Visionen des Zosimos (1938), in: G.W. 13: Studien
cism and mass-movements in contemporary soci- iiber alchemistische Vorstellungen (1978) @ Paracelsus
eties as they manifested in phenomena such as als Artzt (1941/1942), in: G.W. 15: Uber das Phano-

--- Page 77 ---
653 JUNGISM
men des Geistes in Kunst und Wissenschaft (1971) (1997) distinguishes six areas in which Jung’s
Paracelsus als geistige Erscheinung (1942), in: G.W. influence is particularly strong. Jung’s critique of
13: Studien tiber alchemistische Vorstellungen (1978)
mainstream forms of Christianity has inspired the-
¢ Psychologie und Religion (1940), in: G.W. 11: Zur
ological perspectives that incorporate key concepts
Psychologie westlicher und Ostlicher Religion (1963)
Psychologie und Alchemie (1944), G.W. 12 (1972) @ from Jung’s work. Certain forms of feminism have
Synchronizitat als ein Prinzip akausaler Zusammen- incorporated Jung’s ideas on the specificity of,
hdange (1952), in: G.W. 8: Die Dynamik des Unbe- and the differences between, the male and female
wussten (1967) @ Antwort auf Hiob (1952), in: G.W. psyches. There are forms of Biblical interpretation
11: Zur Psychologie westlicher und éstlicher Religion that attempt to read Scriptural narratives as myth
(1963) @ Aton (1951), G.W. 9/2 (1976) @ Mysterium
and to decode these myths by means of a Jungian
Contunctionis (1955/56), G.W. 14/1 and 14/2 (1968) @
hermeneutic framework. In the phenomenology of Erinnerungen, Trdume, Gedanken von C.G. Jung
(Aniela Jaffé, ed.), Zurich: Rascher, 1961 @ Briefe religion there have been efforts to ground the pre-
(3 vols.; 1906-1961) (Aniela Jaffé, ed.), Olten: Walter- sumed universality of certain religious elements,
Verlag, 1972/1973 @ Sigmund Freud/Carl Gustav such as hero myths, in Jung’s archetypes. A number
Jung, Briefwechsel (William McGuire & Wolfgang of writers attempt to make various Eastern reli-
Sauerlander, eds.), Frankfurt a. M.: Fischer, 1974. gious traditions relevant to a contemporary West-
ern audience by explaining these traditions in a
Lit.: Tilman Evers, Mythos und Emanzipation: Eine
Jungian, psychologizing framework, e.g. as dealing kritische Annaherung an C.G. Jung, Hamburg: Junius,
1984 @ Christian Gaillard, Jung, Paris: Presses univer- with individuation and the quest for the Self.
sitaires de France, 1995 (collection “Que sais-je 2”) Finally, a genre of Christian spiritual literature has
Wouter J. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western attempted to use Jung’s concepts as a resource for
Culture: Esotericism in the Mirror of Secular Thought, spiritual growth.
Leiden, New York, Cologne: E.J. Brill, 1996/Albany: In the context of this Dictionary, it is of particu-
State University of New York Press, 1998, 496-413 @
lar interest to note how themes prevalent in earlier
Ronald Hayman, A Life of Jung, New York, London:
esoteric currents, such as the concept of archetypes W.W. Norton & Co., 1999 @ Christine Maillard, Les
Sept Sermons aux Morts de Carl Gustav Jung, Nancy: and specific symbolic methods of interpreting
Presses Universitaires de Nancy, 1993 # eadem, “Le myth, have entered contemporary culture through
‘mystique’ et la psyché: De la philosophie du mysti- the mediation of Carl Gustav Jung. Whereas most
cisme a la psychanalyse”, in: Hildegard ChAtellier/ manifestations of Jungism included in Wulff’s
Moritz Bafsler (eds.), Mystique, mysticisme et moder-
review arguably belong to “high culture”, there are
nité en Allemagne autour de 1900, Strasbourg: Presses
forms of more popular Jungism that have largely
Universitaires de Strasbourg, 1998, 75-94 # eadem,
“De la Nature a l’inconscient: Jung et le paracelsisme”, been left uncharted in the scholarly literature but
in: Cahiers jungiens de psychanalyse 88 (Spring 1997), are highly relevant to understanding the historical
21-32 Gerhard Wehr, Carl Gustav Jung: Leben, vicissitudes of present-day esotericism. In this
Werk, Wirkung, Munich: Kosel, 1985 @ Richard Noll, sense, Jungism denotes the variety of forms in
The Jung Cult: Origins of a Charismatic Movement, which certain of Jung’s key concepts have been
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994 idem,
adopted by the cultic milieu and have been inte-
The Aryan Christ : The Secret Life of Carl Jung, New
grated into a popularized esoteric world view that
York: Random House, 1997 Robert Segal (ed.), The
Gnostic Jung: Selections from Writings of C.G. Jung hovers between the psychological and the religious.
and his Critics, Princeton: Princeton University Press, The incorporation of Jungism into modern
1992. unchurched religiosity in general, and into > New
Age discourse in particular, is hardly surprising,
CHRISTINE MAILLARD considering that Jung was deeply interested in a
variety of beliefs and practices that have later come
Jungism to interest many individuals and groups in the cul-
tic milieu. As is well known, Jung wrote on topics
The impact of > Carl Gustav Jung’s ideas in con- such as mediumistic trance phenomena, the divina-
temporary society has been both considerable and tory techniques of > astrology and the I Ching, on
selective. To mention just a few areas, there are UFO’s, on the astrological ages and on > corre-
modes of therapeutic intervention, psychological spondences (under the guise of synchronicity). He
tests, forms of myth analysis, branches of Christian adapted such esoteric motifs to the requirements of
theology as well as a host of literary and artistic a psychologizing and scientistic epoch. However,
products that betray the influence of Jungian Jung’s oeuvre is vast and diverse, and popular Jun-
thought. gism as defined here represents a selective appro-
Specifically for the domain of religion, Wulff priation and recasting of this corpus.

--- Page 78 ---
JUNGISM 654
The precise genealogies that lead from Jung’s ers. The belief that an enhanced awareness of syn-
own work to the popularizations and reinterpreta- chronicities can enrich one’s life is found in a wide
tions found in the cultic milieu have to date not range of literature, from James Redfield’s > New
been traced in any scholarly work, and only the Age best-seller The Celestine Prophecy (1995) toa
outlines of the process can be given here. Perhaps host of contemporary management texts. Fourthly,
the most important single line of transmission of the Jungian concept of individuation, i.e. of psy-
Jung’s ideas into a broader Jungian religiosity have chological and spiritual development as teleologi-
been the Eranos conferences. Beginning in 1933, cally directed toward the goal of wholeness, is a
Jungian speakers, including Jung himself, were recurrent theme. Jungian astrologers can thus
invited to hold lectures on a variety of topics in the understand transits, i.e. the celestial events said to
history of religions. These lectures were recorded in correspond with events in a person’s life, as parts of
a series of highly influential yearbooks. Due to this a vast cycle of development that potentially leads to
distinct Jungian emphasis, Eranos became a forum psychological as well as spiritual integration.
for the dissemination of a specific interpretation of A feature that is common to these popular eso-
Western esoteric thought, primarily to an intellec- teric manifestations of Jungism is the more or less
tual audience. extensive reinterpretation of Jung’s own thought.
Whereas the Eranos conferences were conducted Seven main differences between the corpus of
in a cerebral and elitist format, Jungism entered the Jung’s writings and the uses made of it by later Jun-
mainstream of popular culture in America and gians can be singled out: (1) Jung saw religious
Western Europe not least due to the influence of experience as a form of personal experience, albeit
Joseph Campbell (1904-1987). Campbell popular- an important one, not as an unproblematic reflex
ized Jungian ways of approaching myth, and dis- of a spiritual reality. Jungian beliefs that religious
seminated them widely through popular books and experiences point at some part of the mind being
through his many appearances in the media. His linked to the divine are not readily compatible with
book The Hero with a Thousand Faces (1949) has Jung’s own perspective. (2) Jung explored and
thus been one of the most successful Jungian books modified his concepts repeatedly throughout a
on myth ever to be published. career that spanned 65 years, and often changed his
Beside the specific influence of Eranos and of opinion or contradicted himself. Jungism tends to
Joseph Campbell, Jungism is also a_ loosely be far more homogenizing, a propensity that may
bounded form of discourse created by a host of sep- be due to Jung’s often arcane references and
arate individuals and groups. To name a few exam- obscure style and the concomitant temptation for
ples, there are Jungian modes of astrology, Jungian Jungians to be largely reliant on secondary litera-
> tarot interpretations and Jungian readings of ture. (3) The aspects of Jung’s work that are the
myth that have been created by people operating least “spiritual” are among those that have been
independently both of the Eranos movement and of tacitly dropped. This applies especially to experi-
each other. mental, psychological research on word associa-
Four themes in Jung’s work have resonated espe- tions and on complexes, in which Jung reveals a
cially well with the concerns of later Jungian spiri- positivistic side that one rarely if ever sees a trace of
tuality. Firstly, myths are read for their potential to in later Jungian literature. (4) Jung is prone to see-
enrich the lives of their contemporary readers with ing the human psyche as the locus of overpowering,
spiritual and psychological insight. An especially even destructive forces, a view that is fundamen-
influential sub-genre, represented by authors such tally at odds with the generally optimistic outlook
as Jean Shinoda Bolen (Goddesses in Everywoman, of much later Jungism. Whereas Jung repeatedly
1985) and Robert Bly (Iron John, 1990), is directed warns of the dangers of being swamped by arche-
at exploring one’s masculinity or femininity typal forces, Jungian literature can invite readers to
through myths. Secondly, the concept of archetypes identify with or draw power from archetypes. (5)
is ubiquitous in Jungian attempts to explain the Jung was also fundamentally elitist, believing that
inner meaning of myths, of dreams and of certain only a minority of people has reached the spiritual
powerful experiences. Jungian astrologers and Jun- maturity needed to understand and accept his
gian tarot readers thus commonly understand the ideas. The egalitarian ideal of much of contempo-
symbols of the birth chart and of the tarot deck rary Western society is at odds with such a view. (6)
as representing archetypal experiences. Thirdly, Jung was highly critical of the attempts by West-
synchronicity, the purported connection between erners to adopt Eastern doctrines or to practice
causally unrelated events that have a feel of sig- rituals of Indian origin such as yoga. Modern Jun-
nificance, is a topic explored by many Jungian writ- gians, on the other hand, are apt to eagerly embrace

--- Page 79 ---
655 JUNG-STILLING
the Orient as a positive Other. Conversely, Jung Goethe, who published it anonymously without the
was also heir to a nationalist or vdlkisch stream of author’s knowledge. In 1778, he was named profes-
thought, seeing certain spiritual practices as more sor of political economy at Kaiserslauten. His first
suitable to one’s own “ “race” or people. This is a wife having died, he remarried. An Aulic Councilor
topic explored at length by critics but generally in 1784, he was named professor at the University
passed by in silence in Jungian texts. (7) Finally, of Marburg in 1786. Simultaneously with his teach-
Jungian concepts are readily applied to domains in ing activities, he undertook many cataract opera-
which Jung himself had only a marginal interest. A tions, many of them successful. His major concern
prime example is the tarot. Jung mentions the tarot remained nevertheless to write works to the glory of
only in passing, whereas the 1980’s and 1990’s the Christian religion. This activity and its success
have seen the emergence of an entire genre of Jun- excited the envy and criticism of his university col-
gian exegeses of the tarot. leagues. To his professional worries was added the
Jung’s ideas have thus been received in a way pain of losing his second wife. He married a third
analogous to that of many canonical scriptures. time, with an accomplished woman who was able
They are referred to with great respect by Jungians to bring harmony to his disordered lifestyle. Having
as constituting a fund of spiritual wisdom, but are finally entered into the service of prince Friedrich
nevertheless in practice used as a pool of cultural von Baden, who freed him from material worry, he
resources from which one can freely pick, choose was able to write and publish at his leisure, produc-
and reinterpret various elements. ing many religious writings of eschatological and
prophetic content. He devoted himself to this zeal-
Lit.: Thomas Hakl, Der verborgene Geist von Eranos: ously until his death in 1817.
Unbekannte Begegnungen von Esoterik und Wissen-
Prior to becoming a reputed economist and a
schaft, Bretten: Scientia nova, 2001 @ Petteri Pietikai-
famous surgeon, Jung had known literary glory nen, C.G. Jung and the Psychology of Symbolic Forms,
Helsinki: Academia Scientiarum Fennica, 1999 @ owing to his autobiography. The first three vol-
Robert Segal, Joseph Campbell: An Introduction, New umes are marked by a sensitive tone and style,
York: Garland, 1986 # Steven M. Wasserstrom, Reli- simultaneously colored by piety, freshness, and
gion After Religion: Gershom Scholem, Mircea Eliade naivety, that found an enthusiastic response in pre-
and Henry Corbin at Eranos, Princeton: Princeton Romantic literary circles. In the fourth and fifth
University Press, 1999 @ David Wulff, Psychology of
volumes this charm is missing because the author
Religion: Classic and Contemporary Perspectives.
relies too much on the intervention of divine prov- New York: John Wiley, 1997.
idence. His edifying and didactic side henceforth
OLAV HAMMER becomes all the more tiresome as his style suffers
from obvious carelessness.
The tireless zeal he displays in glorifying and
Jung-Stilling, Johann Heinrich deepening religion has often caused Jung to be per-
(Johann Heinrich Jung), * 12.9.1740 ceived as a Pietist, but such a judgment is question-
Hilchenbach, t 2.4.1817 Karlsruhe able. Jung appreciated the pietistic conventicles
and even strove to minimize their divergences, but
Raised in a pietistic family, Jung soon distin- he did not adhere to any of them. Moreover, he
guished himself by his intellectual gifts, his sensitiv- showed no reserve in criticizing certain extremist
ity and his lively imagination. Having worked in separatist movements. Partisan of a fusion of
various teaching positions, he left his natal home in Catholicism and Protestantism, he was much more
1762 to escape his father’s rule and exercised vari- a precursor of the ecumenical spirit than he was a
ous occupations while leading a hard life of wan- sectarian Pietist.
dering. Following an illumination, he decided ‘to In his Lebensgeschichte, he wanted to show that
ally himself with God and let himself be guided by human destiny is not subject to blind determinism,
him’, considering adversity a necessary purifying but that a divine plan can be read in it, which does
fire. A patron made it possible for him to broaden not deprive one of free will and the power to
his culture, introduced him to the art of medicine, change individual destiny. As far as Jung was con-
and ultimately oriented him toward the treatment cerned, he considered his own desire to work for
of eye diseases. He went to Strasbourg to study Jesus Christ as having been inspired “from out-
medicine, where he befriended - Goethe and side”, that is, by God, for his sensual nature
Herder and through them discovered the literary worked against it. On all the crucial moments of his
movement of German pre-Romanticism. In 1774, life, he relied on God’s guidance.
he gave the first part of his Lebensgeschichte to Jung’s system is not much different from that of

--- Page 80 ---
JUNG-STILLING 656
the other Christian theosophers. We find in it the Decker, 1787 # Der Graue Mann, in 30 issues, hrsg.
theory of the double fall, first of Lucifer and his von. J.H. Jung-Stilling, Nuremberg: Raw’sche Buch-
handlung, 1795-1816 @ Das Heimweh, 2 vols., Mar-
cohorts, then of Man, who lets himself be tempted
burg: Akademische Buchhandlung, 1794/1795 ¢
by the fallen angels and sees himself punished by
Scenen aus dem Geisterreich, Frankfurt am Main: Var-
being deprived of the divine Light and plunged in a rentrapp & Wenner, 1795-1801 @ Theorie der Geis-
world of opaque matter. To remedy such a dra- terkunde (1808), Leipzig: ZA-Reprint, 1987
matic situation, nothing less is needed than a good Apologie der Theorie der Geisterkunde, Nuremberg:
and compassionate God sacrificing his only Son for Raw’sche Buchhandlung, 1809.
the love of humanity.
Lit.: Jacques Fabry, Johann Heinrich Jung-Stilling
The troubled events of the era, notably the
(1740-1817): Esotérisme chrétien et prophétisme
French Revolution and the abominations of the apocalyptique, Bern: Peter Lang, 2003 # Max Geiger,
Reign of Terror, pushed Jung to favor, in his work, Aufklarung und Erweckung: Beitrage zur Erforschung
the eschatological aspect of theosophy at the Johann Heinrich Jung-Stillings und der Erweckungs-
expense of cosmogony and cosmology. From 1779 geschichte, Ziirich: EVZ, 1963 Hans R.G. Gunther,
to 1783 appeared three educational novels in which Jung-Stilling. Ein Beitrag zur Psychologie des Pietis-
the hero, like the author, has to undergo a “trial mus, 2nd ed., Munich: J. & S. Federmann, 1948 # Otto
W. Hahn, Jung-Stilling zwischen Pietismus und Aufkla-
by fire” before divine providence assures his tri-
rung: Sein Leben und sein literarisches Werk, Bern:
umph and salvation. His novel Theobald oder die Peter Lang, 1988 @ idem, Johann Heinrich Jung-Still-
Schwarmer (Theobald or the Enthusiasts; 1783- ing, Wuppertal & Zurich: Brockhaus, 1990 # Wolfgang
1785) denounces the errors of the separatists and Liick, Johann Heinrich Jung-Stilling Wirtschaftswis-
other exalted dreamers. His anonymous little work senschaftler, Arzt und Schriftsteller, Marburg: Hitze-
entitled Blicke in die Geheimnisse der Natur- roth, 1990 @ Gerhard Merk, Jung-Stilling, ein Umriss
seines Lebens, Kreuztal: Wielandschmiede, 1989 ¢@weisheit (Glances into the Secrets of the Wisdom of
Gerhard Schwinge, Jung-Stilling als Erbauungsschrift-
Nature; 1787) develops a mystico-kabbalistic sys-
steller der Erweckung, Gottingen: Vandenhoeck &
tem where all the themes dear to the Christian Ruprecht, 1994 @ idem, Johann Heinrich Jung-Stilling:
theosophers are found again. His roman 4 clef Das Briefe, Giessen: Brunnen Verlag, 2002. For a complete
Heimweh (Nostalgia; 1794-1976) is a long initia- bibliography, contact: Jung-Stilling-Gesellschaft, Post-
tory and symbolic story that plunges the reader fach D-57004 Siegen.
into a prophetic and eschatological atmosphere.
Later, exposed to criticism from intellectual circles, JACQUES FABRY
the author turned toward the concerns of the com-
mon people and published several reviews of pop- Justin the Gnostic, 2nd cent.
ular edification, of which the most important
remains Der Graue Mann (The Grey Man; 1795 to Justin was a 2nd-century Gnostic of whose life
1816). Criticism and gibes did not prevent the nothing is known, but whose ideas have been pre-
intrepid philosopher from scrutinizing the secrets served in a rather extensive report by Hippolytus,
of the intermediary world of the invisible spirits in Refutatio V, 23-27 (summary in X, 15, 1-7). Hip-
his Scenen aus dem Geisterreich (Scenes from the polytus’ report was based on Justin’s most famous
Spirit Realm; 1795-1801) and in his Theorie der book, called Baruch, but it cannot be decided with
Geisterkunde (Theory of the Science of Spirits; certainty whether he knew the work directly or
1808-1809). only though an intermediary source.
To this indefatigable worker we furthermore According to Justin, there are three eternal prin-
owe, besides his theosophical publications and an ciples of the universe, called the Good One, Elohim
enormous correspondence, eleven works on politi- and Edem. The first two are male, the third one is
cal economy, without forgetting two thousand female. Only the Good One has the foreknowledge
cataract operations. However, it is especially for his of everything, the two others are without fore-
tireless zeal in announcing the kingdom of God and knowledge. The Good One is obviously the un-
for his intense quest for a position midway between known and unknowable first principle that is
an arid rationalism and an equally deadening reli- found in many Gnostic systems. Elohim is called
gious fanaticism that the theosopher from Sieger- ‘the Father of all things created’. As already indi-
land deserves a place among the greatest. cated by his name, he has a strong resemblance
with the Jewish Creator God. Edem is said to be
Jung-Stillings Lebensgeschicte (1777-1804), Berlin:
Rowohlt, 1969 Theobald oder die Schwdrmer, 2 ‘irascible, double-minded and double-bodied’; she
vols., Leipzig: Weygand, 1785 @ Blicke in die Ge- is also called Israel and Earth. She has apparently
heimnisse der Naturweisheit, Berlin & Leipzig: G.J. borrowed her name from the Garden of Eden

--- Page 81 ---
657 JUSTIN THE GNOSTIC
(Genesis 2:8ff.), but since she is the mythical per- turn to the Good One, just as Elohim had done
sonification of Earth there must also be an associa- himself. But Naas, through the soul in man,
tion with the Hebrew word ’adamah, “earth”. She seduced them not to follow the words of Baruch.
is called “double-bodied” because she is a half- Even an uncircumcised “prophet”, Heracles, was
maiden, a virgin above and a viper below. sent by Elohim to prevail over the twelve angels of
According to Justin, the material world is not Edem (his twelve labours), but he failed too.
bad, nor is marriage. From the mutual sexual desire Finally, Baruch was sent to Nazareth, and there he
of Elohim and Edem sprang twelve paternal and found Jesus, the twelve-year-old son of Joseph and
twelve maternal angels, who together formed the Mary, who was tending sheep. He was sent to
Paradise in Eden; they are allegorically called explain what had happened in the beginning and to
“trees”. The third paternal angel, Baruch (= Hebr. tell the people about the Father Elohim and the
“the Blessed One”), is identified with the Tree of Good One. As Naas failed to beguile Jesus too and
Life, the third maternal angel, Naas (= Hebr. for that reason caused him to be crucified, Jesus
“Snake”), with the Tree of Knowledge. The angels gave his body and soul back to Edem, commended
of Elohim created Adam by taking some of the his spirit to Elohim, and ascended to the Good
most excellent earth, i.e. from the upper, anthro- One.
poid parts of Edem, whereas the animals and other In Justin’s system, Jesus is the first person who
living beings were created from her lower, animal listened to Baruch’s exhortation to leave Edem and
parts. Adam received his spirit (pmeuma) from Elo- to ascend to the Father and the Good One. The ini-
him and his soul (psyché) from Edem, and the same tiates of Justin’s sect follow his example. Before the
happened to Eve after her creation. ‘And man mysteries were disclosed to them they had to swear
became a kind of seal and memorial of their love ‘not to divulge them to anyone and not to relapse
and an eternal symbol of the marriage of Edem and from the Good One to the creation’. Then they
Elohim’ (V, 26, 8). Every human marriage is an ascended to the Good One and saw ‘what eye has
image of the archetypal marriage of Elohim and not seen, nor ear heard, nor has entered into the
Edem, i.e. of Heaven and Earth. heart of man’ (V, 27, 2). They also drank from life-
After the creation of the cosmos, ‘as a result of giving water, which they interpreted as a bath in the
their joint pleasure’ (V, 26, 14), Elohim ascended to water above the firmament, ‘in which spiritual and
the highest parts of heaven in order to see whether living men are washed’ (V, 27, 3).
there was any deficiency in the created world. Since nothing ofJustin’s life and career is known,
There he saw a light far superior to that which he it is only on the basis of his ideas that some sugges-
himself had created and by that he discovered the tions about his background can be made. Many of
existence of the Good One, who said to him: ‘Sit on his ideas are reminiscent of those fostered by the
my right hand’ (Psalm r1o:1). When Edem realised Jewish Christians, by the Elkesaites [> Elchasai],
that Elohim would not return, she became angry by the + Mandaeans and the Manichaeans [>
and commanded her first angel, Babel, i.e. Venus, Mani; > Manichaeism]. In addition to the general
to cause adultery and dissolution of marriages Jewish outlook of Justin’s myth, the following may
among men, so that they might undergo the same be mentioned: Jesus’ instruction by Baruch at the
suffering she endured from Elohim’s departure. She age of twelve, that of the bar mitswah (Jewish; cf.
also ordered Naas, her third angel, to chastise the Luke 2:42, but also Mani’s first encounter with his
spirit of man, so that Elohim might be punished Twin); Jesus as the natural son of Joseph and Mary
through the suffering of the spirit he had given. (Jewish Christians); the emphasis on marriage and
Naas seduced Eve and also had a homosexual rela- procreation and the severe rejection of sexual sins
tionship with Adam, ‘whence have arisen adultery (Jewish Christians, Elkesaites, Mandaeans); the
and homosexuality’. In Justin’s view, the origin of successive missions of Baruch to Adam, > Moses,
evil was ultimately due to the fact that both Elohim the prophets, Hercules, and Jesus, corresponding
and Edem were without foreknowledge, so that to those of the “True Prophet” (Jewish Christians),
Elohim could not foresee what was to happen of Elchasai and the revealers of truth before Mani;
when he did not return to Edem after his discovery the corruption of the Law and the prophets (Jewish
of the Good One. It is even said that vice and virtue Christians, Elchasai). On the basis of all this, it
arose ‘from one single source — that of the Father’ seems most likely that Justin had a Jewish-Chris-
(V, 26, 23-24). tian background. He retained the basic Jewish and
In order to save the spirit of man, Elohim sent his Christian idea that the Creator and the creation are
third angel, Baruch, to Adam, to Moses and to the good and he stuck to the Jewish-Christian belief
prophets, inciting the spirit to desert Edem and to that Jesus, the prophet from Nazareth, had

--- Page 82 ---
JUSTIN THE GNOSTIC 658
brought the final revelation, but his Gnostic incli- into practice and offered his pupils, who came from
nations apparently compelled him to a radical rein- every country in Europe, an original method that
terpretation of Jewish religious history. he called “mutual instruction”. The older children
taught the younger; mutual aid rather than compe-
M. Marcovich (ed.), Hippolytus: Refutatio omnium tition was encouraged. Rivail was to retain the hall-
haeresium (PTS, 25), Berlin & New York: De Gruyter, mark of this environment, in which a sense of
1986 @ English trans. (after the German trans. by
order, personal discipline, and respect for differ-
E. Haenchen) in: W. Foerster (ed.), Gnosis: A Selection
ences were basic values. of Gnostic Texts, Engl. trans. edited by R. McL. Wil-
son), vol. 1, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972, and by When he was twenty, he moved to Paris and soon
J.H. MacMahon, in ANCL, vol. 6, Edinburgh: T&T established a private school (Institut Rivail) in Rue
Clark, 1868-1869 (repr. ANF, vol. 5, Edinburgh/ de Sévres, based upon Pestalozzi’s pedagogical
Grand Rapids: T&T Clark/W.B. Eerdmans, 1995). method. The young teacher soon published his first
book, Cours pratique et théorique d’arithmétique
Lit.: R. van den Broek, “The Shape of Edem according
(Practical and Theoretical Course of Arithmetic).
to Justin the Gnostic”, Vigiliae Christianae 27 (1973),
35-45 (= idem, Studies in Gnosticism and Alexandrian Convinced of the need to reform educational meth-
Christianity [NHMS, 39], Leiden: Brill, 1996, 131- ods in France, he believed that pedagogy had to
141) @R. van den Broek, “Gospel Traditions and Sal- become a precisely defined science. In 1828 he pub-
vation in Justin the Gnostic”, Vigiliae Christianae, 57 lished his Plan pour l’amélioration de I’Education
(2003), 363-388 @ R.M. Grant, “Gnosticism and the Publique (Plan for the Improvement of Public Edu-
Problem of Methodology”, in: idem, After the New
cation) in which he emphasized that public instruc-
Testament, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1967, 194-
tion should give much attention to morality. A 207 E. Haenchen, “Das Buch Baruch. Ein Beitrag
zum Problem der christlichen Gnosis”, Zeitschrift fiir reader of Fourier, Rivail was sensitive to the goals
Theologie und Kirche 50 (1953), 123-158 (= idem, of peaceful social reform inspired by Republican
Gott und Mensch: Gesammelte Aufsdtze, Tubingen: values. He was a member of several learned soci-
J.C.B. Mohr, 1965, 298-334) @ J. Jacobsen Buckley, eties, notably the Royal Society of Arras, which in
“Transcendence and Sexuality in the Book of Baruch”,
1831 awarded him a prize for his essay on the ques-
History of Religions 24 (1984/85), 328-344 (= idem,
tion “Which system of study is most in harmony
Female Fault and Fulfilment in Gnosticism, Chapel
Hill and London: University of North Carolina Press, with the needs of our times?” Fascinated with sci-
1863-1919) @ K. Kvideland, “Elohims Himmelfahrt”, ence, he was for many years secretary of the
Temenos 10 (1974), 68-78 # M. Marcovich, “Justin’s Phrenological Society of Paris and took part in the
Baruch: A Showcase of Gnostic Syncretism”, in: idem, activities of the Society of Magnetism, leading
Studies in Graeco-Roman Religions and Gnosticism investigations into the phenomena of somnambu-
(Studies in Greek and Roman Religion, 4), Leiden:
lism. In 1832 he married Amélie Boudet, a school-
Brill, 1988, 93-119 @ M. Olender, “Eléments pour une
teacher who shared his passion for education. analyse de Priape chez Justin le Gnostique”, in: M.B. de
Boer & T.A. Edridge (eds.), Hommages a Maarten J. However, in 1835 they had to close the school
Vermaseren (EPRO, 68), vol. 2, Leiden: Brill, 1978, because of financial difficulties. Rivail, who subse-
874-897 @ A. Orbe, “La cristologia de Justino gnés- quently taught at the Lévy-Alvarés School, contin-
tico”, Estudios Ecclesiasticos 47 (1972), 437-457 ued to publish teaching manuals, including the
M. Simonetti, “Note sul Libro di Baruch dello gnostico
Catéchisme grammatical de la langue francaise
Giustino”, Vetera Christianorum 6 (1969), 71-89.
(Grammatical Catechism of the French Language),
published in 1848. Most of his works were adopted
ROELOF VAN DEN BROEK
by the University and brought him sufficient
income to live comfortably.
Kabbalah > Jewish Influences
Kardec had established a reputation as a sensible
educator when, in 1854, he heard about the spiri-
Kardec, Allen (ps. of Denizard tualist practice of “table-turning”. According to
Hyppolyte Léon Rivail), * 3.10.1804 his biographers he remained skeptical at first, but
Lyons, + 31.3.1869 Paris the following year, having attended a few séances,
he turned to experimenting himself. He joined a
Léon Rivail was born at 76 Rue Sala in Lyons. group of friends who were communicating with the
His father, a jurist in that city, sent him to study, spirits in the manner imported from the United
from the age of ten, in Yverdon (Switzerland), States, typtology (a spiritualist technique of com-
in one of the most famous institutions of the municating with spirits by means of rapping with
era, directed by Rousseau’s disciple Jean Henri various codes, arranged for the purpose). The
Pestalozzi. Pestalozzi put the pedagogy of Emile group recognized the dramatist Victorien Sardou

--- Page 83 ---
659 KARDEC
as their best medium, and Camille Flammarion according to which the soul keeps evolving even
soon became active in the séances as well. Rivail after death, following a cycle of reincarnations.
confidentially received some fifty notebooks of Progress for him was the eternal law of human-
written “communications” obtained within the ity, and his fundamental values were Work and
group a few months earlier; they included several Reason. Within spiritist circles Kardec opened
thousand messages dealing with a great variety of libraries, established fellowship funds, and organ-
subjects. From 1856 on, he worked on categorizing ized collections for the needy. His spiritist associa-
and ordering the material in these notebooks, tions were open to women and even children; they
which seemed to him to contain a coherent teach- were devoted to prayer for the dead and dispensing
ing. A spirit then revealed to him one of his previ- free magnetic therapies. Kardec wished them to be
ous lives: he had been a Druid in Gaul, and his meeting-places for people belonging to all social
name had been Allan Kardec. Rivail now defini- strata, including the working classes as well as the
tively assumed this identity as his own. gentry. Rejecting the inevitability of evil and the
During the course of new séances, Kardec ques- idea of degeneration, he fought against child labor.
tioned the spirits in view of perfecting what he con- Spiritism thus took on new dimensions by getting
sidered their doctrine. His group would prepare the associated with social causes such as educational
questions; and the mediums would take down reform and the improvement of the position of the
the messages dictated by the spirits. Soon aided by proletariat. In a century when the Christian social-
“the spirit of Truth”, Kardec then transcribed it all ists identified the proletariat with the suffering
at home in his apartment on Rue des Martyrs. The Christ, spiritism encouraged a working class Mes-
“spirit of Truth” now revealed his mission to him: sianism. An anti-clerical social reformer, Kardec
to establish spiritism and propagate the doctrine wanted to reconcile faith and reason: ‘It is not
delivered during the séances. In 1857, Kardec enough to believe’, he said, ‘one has to understand’.
published Le livre des esprits (The Spirits’ Book), Kardec’s spiritism has enjoyed much success
which was an instantaneous success. Reprinted abroad, traveling even as far as Asia (notably to
several times in about a decade, it came to be rec- Viet-Nam, where it gave birth to the “Caodaist”
ognized as the bible of communication with the movement). However, it is first and foremost in
hereafter. A practical, moral, and spiritual guide, it Brazil that it has become a full-fledged religion,
contained many messages supposed to have come extremely active and well-represented today in the
from the famous departed: Socrates, Plato, and St. middle classes. Its influence, as a syncretic develop-
+ Augustine, but also ~ Swedenborg and other ment, on Afro-Brazilian religions (Candomble,
philosophers, as well as scholars and poets. Umbanda) greatly fascinates contemporary ethno-
This was the starting point of a new religion, graphers. In other countries of Latin America, new
called spiritism, and organized by Kardec as a uni- forms of spiritism are currently developing in the
versal school. In 1861, he wrote the code of con- direction of neo-shamanism. Such developments
duct for mediums, The Mediums’ Book, which demonstrate the continuing international vitality
established a typology of spirits’ modes of com- of Kardec’s spiritist movement.
munication with humans (e.g. writing mediums,
Lit.: Christine Bergé, La voix des esprits: Ethnologie
clairaudient ones, others who “embody” the spirits
du spiritisme, Paris: Métailié, 1990 @ Nicole Edelman,
and lend them the use of their voices and faces, and “Allan Kardec: Le prophete du spiritisme”, L’Histoire
so on). Despite the general outcry that these prac- 98 (1987), 62-69 eadem, ed., Voyantes, guérisseuses
tices provoked in Catholic circles, Kardec contin- et visionnaires en France (1785-1914), Paris: Albin
ued to spread the doctrine. In a few years, almost Michel, 1995 # David J. Hess, Spirits and Scientists:
one hundred spiritist centers sprang up, about Ideology, Spiritism and Brazilian Culture, Pennsylvania
fifteen of them in Lyons. Many who had lost their State Univ. Park, r991 Régis Ladous, Le spiritisme,
Paris: Cerf et Fides, coll. Bref, 1989 @ Frangois Laplan-
social position, their roots, or their loved ones, or
tine & Marion Aubrée, Le livre, la table, les esprits,
were suffering from illness, came to adopt this new Paris: Lattés, 1990 @ Pedro McGregor, Jesus of the
religion in which the belief in spirits went along Spirits, Stein and Day, 1967 # André Moreil, La vie et
with a quest for “proofs”: for Kardec saw spiritism Poeuvre d’Allan Kardec, Paris: Vermet, 1981 David
as a scientific religion, with a calling to critically St.Clair, Drum and Candle, Doubleday, 1971
study mediumistic “phenomena”. In 1858, he C. Varéze, Allan Kardec, Paris: Athena, 1948 @ Jean
Vartier, Allan Kardec: La naissance du spiritisme,
founded the Revue Spirite in Paris, which con-
Paris: Hachette, 1971 @ Z. Wanthuil & E Thiesen,
tained exchanges of testimonies and articles about Allan Kardec, 3 vols., Rio de Janeiro: FEB, 1980.
the study of such phenomena.
Kardec developed a “pedagogy of suffering”, CHRISTINE BERGE

--- Page 84 ---
KERNER 660
Kerner, Justinus Andreas Christian, extreme sensitivity to certain external influences
* 18.9.1786 Ludwigsburg, t 21.2.1862 (such as e.g. the presence of cats, iron nails, music),
Weinsberg made clairvoyant predictions and prescriptions for
(self-)healing, and were the focus of sometimes
German Romantic poet and writer, physician, spectacular “paranormal” phenomena. Sometimes
and early investigator of occult phenomena. Born they also developed complex and highly individual
as the sixth and youngest child of a county com- linguistic and numerological systems (“inner lan-
missioner and civil servant, Kerner was originally guage”; “inner arithmetic”). In studying such phe-
trained for a business career. At the age of twelve he nomena, and interpreting them as manifestations
was healed of a nervous ailment by the practitioner of the “magical” power of Nature, Kerner was
of > animal magnetism Eberhard Gmelin (1751- fighting a battle on two fronts. Against traditional
1809): his first contact with a method of treatment religious supernaturalism he emphasized that
he would himself practice in his later medical somnambulic powers were not “miraculous” but
career. From 1804 to 1808 he studied medicine in entirely natural; but against the new natural sci-
Tubingen, where he got involved ina circle of poets ence he emphasized that the hidden, occult forces
and began to write poems himself. After complet- of nature could not be understood from the merely
ing his studies he traveled to Hamburg, where rationalist perspective of ‘those who, enclosed in
he worked in a hospital run by his brother and the isolating glass tablet (tabula vitrea) of their
expanded his contacts in literary circles. In 1809 he skull, have no idea of a sympathy of things and a
went on to Vienna, where he met Friedrich Schlegel higher spiritual life’ (Kerner 1824, VI). In all his
and Ludwig van Beethoven. Having returned to his writings about “occult phenomena”, Kerner’s goal
native Wiirttemberg in 1810, he worked as a physi- was to provide “empirical facts” that might under-
cian in several villages, until being appointed in mine the ideologies of Enlightenment rationalists
January 1819 as town physician of Weinsberg, and adherents of mechanicist science, and prove
where he would remain for the rest of his life. His the truth of an “enchanted” spiritual worldview on
house in Weinsberg, built in 1822 and nowadays a panentheist foundations. ~~ Animal magnetism
museum devoted to his life and work, became a was central to that project, and Kerner was in fact the
major meeting place for poets and thinkers. On top first author to make a systematic attempt at inves-
of the hill “Weibertreu” near Weinsberg one can tigating Franz Anton Mesmer’s life and documents.
still find the signatures of major Romantic poets In 1824 Kerner published his first book on oc-
and philosophers written on the walls of the ruins. cult phenomena: Geschichte zweyer Somnambulen
In Kerner’s literary work — notably his story “Die (History of Two Somnambules). It was later over-
Heimatlosen” (The Homeless) — one finds many shadowed by his famous book on the Seeress of
traces of the theosophically-oriented Natur- Prevorst, but is actually a very interesting case
philosophie typical of German > Romanticism, study of two young girls from Weinsberg who were
including a strong interest in the “occult phenom- successfully treated by Kerner. The first patient,
ena” associated with the “Nightside of Nature”. Christiane Kapplinger (the second is known only as
Of major importance for Kerner’s development in Caroline St.), is particularly interesting not only
this regard were > Johann Heinrich Jung-Stilling’s because of her lively visions of heaven and hell
Theorie der Geister-Kunde and > Gotthilf Hein- (reminiscent of + Swedenborg) but also because
rich von Schubert’s Ansichten von der Nachtseite she later became a religious writer in her own right,
der Naturwissenschaft, both published in 1808. with a book that she claimed was “dictated” to
Kerner, who had been fascinated by stories about her from a spiritual source (Beschreibungen iiber
spirits and ghosts from an early age, read the first das Wesen der Gottheit, der menschlichen Natur
book while still a student in Tiibingen and the sec- und der christlichen Religion (Descriptions about
ond in the summer of 1812, and his later work as the Essence of the Deity, Human Nature and the
an investigator of the occult is decisively influenced Christian Religion], Kronstadt: Romer & Kamner,
by them. 1881).
Kerner’s daily practice as a physician brought Two years later (november 1826), Kerner was
him in contact with the medical condition associ- introduced to the somnambulic patient who would
ated with “somnambulism”, which was frequent inspire his most famous book: Friederike Hauffe
in Wirttemberg. Somnambulic patients — mostly (1801-1829), later known as “the Seeress of Pre-
women - typically suffered from severe cramps and vorst”. Hauffe arrived in Weinsberg as a very sick
sweats, accompanied by a variety of trance states patient, but during the last three years of her life
in which they saw ghosts and visions, displayed she came to assume the public role of an inspired

--- Page 85 ---
661 KERNER
visionary whose trances allowed her to be in daily ther developed by von Meyer) and from hell, and
contact with the spiritual world and its inhabitants. by adding extra pencilstrokes he indeed turned
Among those who visited her sickbed were such them into weird demonic or semi-demonic figures.
great names as >> F. von Baader, J. von Gorres, J.K. They were accompanied by poems that reflected
Passavant, > E.W.J. Schelling, EK Schleiermacher, Kerner’s increasing preoccupation with death and
G.H. von Schubert, and D.F. Strauss. Once having the afterlife. Kerner died of the flu in 1862. By that
given up the hope of curing her, Kerner felt free to time, his book about Friederike Hauffe had already
concentrate on studying her symptoms and supra- been translated into English (by Catherine Crowe,
normal abilities; and the result was published in the 1845), and his works enjoyed increasingly popu-
year of her death. Die Seherin von Prevorst is one lararity in the decades before and after 1900.
of the earliest attempts at an empirical study of
paranormal phenomena, but is also interesting for Justinus Kerner, Kerners Werke: Auswahl in sechs
Teilen (Raimund Pissin, ed.), 2 vols., Berlin, etc.:
its philosophy of illness and bodily desintegration
Deutsches Verlagshaus Bong & Co (contains “Bilder-
as a condition necessary for experiencing spiritual buch aus meiner Knabenzeit”, “Reiseschatten”, “Die
realities. Seherin von Prevorst”, “Die Heimatlosen”, “Kleckso-
In the following years, Kerner’s focus of interest graphien”, some small prose pieces, and selected
came to include the phenomenon of possession. In poems) @ Geschichte zweyer Somnambiilen: Nebst
his Geschichten Besessener neuerer Zeit (Stories of einigen andern Denkwiirdigkeiten aus dem Gebiete
der magischen Heilkunde und der Psychologie, Karls-
recent possession cases, 1834) he describes several
ruhe: Gottlieb Braun, 1824 Geschichten Besesse-
cases of spirit possession, concentrating on the case
ner neuerer Zeit: Beobachtungen aus dem Gebiete
of Magdalena Grombach, “the girl of Orlach”. kakodadmonisch-magnetischer Erscheinungen . . . nebst
Grombach was possessed by a “black man” who Reflexionen von C.A. Eschenmayer tiber Besessenheit,
claimed to be the spirit of a medieval monk. The Stuttgart: J. Wachendorf, 1834 Eine Erscheinung aus
spirit could not find eternal rest because he had dem Nachtgebiete der Natur, durch eine Reihe von
Zeugen gerichtlich Bestatigt und den Naturforschernseduced and murdered a number of women, whose
zum Bedenken mitgetheilt, Stuttgart & Tubingen:
bodies now lied buried under the foundations of
Cotta, 1836 @ Die somnambulen Tische: Zur Ge-
Grombach’s family house. He wanted Magdalena’s schichte und Erklarung dieser Erscheinung, Stuttgart:
father to break down the house, find the skeletons, Ebner & Seubert, 1853 @ Franz Anton Mesmer aus
and give them a Christian burial. This was finally Schwaben: Entdecker des thierischen Magnetismus,
done, and human bones were actually discovered; Frankfurt: Literarische Anstalt, 1856 Blatter aus Pre-
after the reburial, the possession came to an end. vorst: Originalien und Lesefriichte fiir Freunde des
innern Lebens, mitgetheilt von dem Herausgeber der Cases like these, and stories of ghosts and haunt-
Seherin von Prevorst, Karlsruhe: Gottlieb Braun,
ings generally, kept fascinating Kerner until the end
1831-1833 @ Magikon: Archiv fiir Beobachtungen aus
of his life. This interest led him to publish two suc- dem Gebiete der Geisterkunde und des magnetischen
cessive journals, both of which are of great impor- und magischen Lebens, nebst andern Zugaben fiir Fre-
tance for the early history of psychical research and unde des Innern, Stuttgart: Ebner & Seubert, 1840,
Romantic ~ Naturphilosophie in the German 1842, 1846, 1850, 1853.
domain: the Blatter aus Prevorst (1831-1833) and
Lit.: Heinz Bittiker, Justinus Kerner: Ein Beitrag zur
Magikon (1840-1853). Apart from Kerner himself, Geschichte der Spatromantik, Zurich: Emil Riegg &
they contain contributions by e.g. the philosopher Co, 1952 @ Dario Gamboni, “Der Damon im Tinten-
Adolph Karl August von Eschenmayer (1768- fass: Justinus Kerners ‘Kleksographien’”, Neue Ziir-
1852; also responsible for many of the theoretical cher Zeitung 155 (6-7 Juli 1996), 70 # Heino Gehrts,
discussions in Die Seherin von Prevorst), > Johann Das Mddchen von Orlach: Erlebnisse einer Besesse-
nen, Stuttgart: Ernst Klett, 1966 @ Bettina Gruber, DieFriedrich von Meyer (1772-1849), and Franz von
Seherin von Prevorst: Romantischer Okkultismus als
Baader.
Religion, Wissenschaft und Literatur, Paderborn etc.:
As a late reflection of Kerner’s fascination with Ferdinand Schoningh, 2000 Otto-Joachim Grisser,
the “Nightside of Nature” we have his series of Justinus Kerner 1786-1862: Arzt— Poet — Geisterseher,
Kleksographien, which date from the 1850s but Berlin etc.: Springer, 1987 @ Wouter J. Hanegraaff, “A
were published only in 1890. These bizarre sym- Woman Alone: The Beatification of Friederike Hauffe
metrical shapes were created by folding a piece of née Wanner (1801-1829)”, in: Anne-Marie Korte (ed.),
Women and Miracle Stories: A Multidisciplinary
paper over an inkblot, and may have influenced
Exploration, Leiden, Boston, Koln: E.J. Brill, 2007,
Hermann Rorschach’s psychological tests (1921). 211-247 @ idem, “Versuch tiber Friederike Hauffe:
To Kerner’s imagination they suggested the shapes Zum Verhaltnis zwischen Lebensgeschichte und Mythos
of spirits from the Hades (the protestant version of der ‘Seherin von Prevorst’”, 2 parts, Suevica, 8 (1999-
purgatory, first introduced by Jung-Stilling and fur- 2000) & 9-10 (2004) Rudolf Lang, Neues zur

--- Page 86 ---
KERNER 662
Seherin von Prevorst, Innsbruck: Resch, 1983 @ idem, (Jesus Christ) may be glimpsed in the alchemical
“Die Seherin von Prevorst (1801-1829), Ihr Leben und panacea (Lapis philosophorum). Khunrath’s chem-
ihre Verbindung zur Stadt Lowenstein”, in: K.-H. ical Christianity found its most striking expression
Dahn (ed.), 700 Jahre Stadt Lowenstein, Weinsberg, in one of the Amphitheatrum engravings, which
1987 @ Heinz Schott & Stadt Weinsberg (eds.), Justinus
shows an alchemist praying in a laboratory-cum-
Kerner: Jubilaumsband zum 200. Geburtstag, Weins-
berg: Nachrichtenblatt der Stadt Weinsberg, 1990 oratory. The singular character of the Amphithe-
Heinrich Straumann, Justinus Kerner und der Okkul- atrum rests on an intricate mixture of various
tismus in der deutschen Romantik, Horgen-Zirich/ teachings, which Khunrath derived from the Bible,
Leipzig: Miinster-Presse, 1928. +» alchemy, Kabbalah [> Jewish Influences], >
magic, medicine and history. Khunrath’s associa-
WOUTER J. HANEGRAAFF tive manner of linking the most varied traditions
results in ambiguous and obscure texts and
Ketton, Robert of > Robert of Chester sequences of images, which lead into both spiritual
and natural realms, serving as edification for the
Khunrath, Heinrich (ps.: Ricenus heterodox pious as well as textbooks for alchemists
with an understanding of allegory.
Thrasibulus), * 1560 Leipzig, + 1605
The Amphitheatrum was highly regarded among
Leipzig or Dresden
the early Rosicrucians [> Rosicrucianism] (Johann
Friedrich Jung, Benedictus Figulus, — Johann
Physician and alchemist, “Philo-Theosophus”
Valentin Andreae) and provoked an international
and theo-alchemical author. After graduating as
uproar, discernible by its censure by the university
Dr. med. at the the University of Basle (1588),
theologian Claude Griset (Paris 1625). While
Khunrath initially made a living as the physician of
Khunrath’s other works were reprinted into the
the Bohemian magnate Wilhelm von Rosenberg
18th century, the Amphitheatrum was not repub-
in Bohemia (1591), then chiefly in North and Cen-
lished after its edition at Frankfurt am Main in
tral Germany, namely Berlin (1601), Magdeburg
1653. However, it has remained a treasured text
(1603) and Gera (1604). He became acquainted
among alchemically inclined pietists, theosophers,
with > John Dee (at Bremen in 1589) and Johann
and the nature-mystical followers of > Paracelsus
Grasse (at Hamburg in 1596), corresponded with
and > Boehme in the 17th and 18th centuries, espe-
Johann Arndt and counted Count Albrecht VII von
cially as a commentary by Johann Arndt on four
Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt (Thiringia) among his
Amphitheatrum plates was in circulation. Khun-
patients.
rath was branded by German Enlightenment writ-
Apart from his doctoral dissertation (De sig-
ers as a ‘madman acting in defiance of healthy
natura rerum naturalium, Basle 1588), an edition
reason’ and a ‘philosophical fiend’ (Adelung,
of Zebel (Prague 1592) anda treatise Von... Cura-
1787). The Amphitheatrum found many commen-
tion Tartari (ed. Johann Thurnmiuntzer, Hof 1611)
tators, however, in the wake of the occult revival in
Khunrath wrote numerous alchemical works
France around 1900 (> Eliphas Lévi, > Stanislas
(among them autographs neglected by scholar-
de Guaita, > Papus, Marc Haven), and translators
ship). Khunrath’s work best known today is his
as well (E. Grillot de Givry). It ranks as one of the
Amphitheatrum sapientiae aeternae solius verae,
most important and authoritative works of occult,which first appeared in an abridged version (n.p.
theosophical and alchemical literature among
1595), then in an unabridged one, posthumously
2oth-century esotericists. Khunrath appears as apublished by Erasmus Wolfart (Hanau 1609).
literary figure in Umberto Eco’s Foucault’s Pendu-Thanks to its complex illustrated plates, drawn by
lum (1988).
Jan Vredeman de Vries and engraved by Paul van
der Doort, this work occupies a special place in
Manuscripts. Dresden, Landesbibliothek, Ms. J. 345,
alchemical literature [> Alchemy]. It is erratic tes- Bl. 854r-v: Sigillum Hermetis (Hamburg, December
timony of the early period of alchemical and theo- 1596, to Johann Grasse) @ Halle, Universitatsbiblio-
sophical literature in the tradition later represented thek, Ms. 14 A 12/Tr. 1 and 2: Consilium philosophi-
by the author of Wasserstein der Weisen (1619), cum; Consilium philosophicum practicum (autograph)
Johann Philipp Maullius, > Georg von Welling or Rudolstadt, Staatsarchiv, Ms. A XVI 4g Nr. 16
(Four letters to Count Albrecht VII von Schwarzburg;
~ Friedrich Christoph Oetinger. The work is char-
autographs).
acterised by the theo-alchemical principle that a Printed Works: Confessio de chao physico-chemico-
symbolical counterpart and a natural, incarnate rum catholico, Magdeburg, 1596 @ Vom hyleani-
image of the supernatural and spiritual panacea schen... Chaos, Magdeburg, 1597 (Reprint of the

--- Page 87 ---
663 KINGSFORD
Frankfurt am Main, 1708 edition with an introduction Lexikon einer hermetischen Wissenschaft, Munich:
by Elmar R. Gruber), Graz, 1990 @ Bericht vom philo- C.H. Beck, 1988, 194-196 @ Ralf Tollner, Der un-
sophischen Athanor, Magdeburg, 1597 # Magnesia endliche Kommentar: Untersuchungen zu vier aus-
catholica philosophorum, Magdeburg, 1599 # Sym- gewahlten Kupferstichen aus Heinrich Khunraths
bolum physico-chymicum, n.p., 1598; idem (German “Amphitheatrum Sapientiae Aeternae Solius Verae”
version) Hamburg, 1598 # De igne magorum, Straf- (Hanau 1609) (Wissenschaftliche Beitrage aus euro-
burg, 1608. paischen Hochschulen, Reihe o9: Kulturgeschichte,
Translations of the Amphitheatrum (Hanau, 1609) Bd. 3), Ammersbek: Verlag an der Lottbek, 1991.
and reprints of the plates: Amphithéatre de l’éternelle
sapience, trans. E. Grillot de Givry, Paris, 1898; idem, JOACHIM TELLE
Paris, 1900; idem, Milan, 1975 @ Amphithéatre de la
sagesse éternelle (with commentaries by Papus and Kingsford, Anna Bonus, * 16.9.1846
Marc Haven), Paris, 1906; idem, Lyon, 1946 @
Anfiteatro della Saggezza Eterna, Rome, 1973 ¢@ Stratford (Essex), | 22.2.1888 London
The Amphitheatre Engravings of Heinrich Khunrath
(Magnum Opus Hermetic Sourceworks Series 7), ed. Christian occultist [> occult / occultism] and
Adam McLean, trans. Patricia Tahil, A.McLean, Edin- animal rights activist. Anna Kingsford’s father,
burgh, 1981 (with commentaries by Johann Arndt, St. John Bonus, was a wealthy city merchant of Italian
de Guaita, J.B. Craven) # Amphitheatrum sapientiae descent; her mother had a combined German and
aeternae: Schauplatz der ewig allein wahren Weisheit,
Irish ancestry. Anna was the youngest of a family of
Teil I: Faksimile-Ausgabe des Erstdrucks von [Ham-
twelve children. Since her health left much to be burg] 1595 und des zweiten und letzten Drucks Hanau
1609, mit einer Einleitung, einer Bibliographie der desired — she suffered from asthma — she spent
Drucke und Handschriften Khunraths, sowie Namen- much of her childhood in her father’s library, where
register und Konkordanz der beiden Ausgaben von she read the classics and books on religion and
Carlos Gilly; Teil Il: Transkription einer aus dem 18. mythology. Already as a child she was reputed to
Jahrhundert stammenden deutschen Ubersetzung des have psychic gifts and claimed to have kinship with
Amphitheatrum sapientiae aeternae, mit einer Ein-
fairies who visited her during her sleep. She liked
leitung von Anja Hallacker und Hans-Peter Neumann
(Clavis Pansophiae, Bd. 6/Tle. 1-2), Stuttgart-Bad writing: at the age of nine she published a poem in
Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 2004. a religious journal, and at thirteen she published
her first book, Beatrice: A Tale of the Early Chris-
Lit.: Johann Christoph Adelung, Geschichte der men- tians. Around that time, Annie, as she used to be
schlichen Narrheit, Tl. 5, Leipzig, 1787, 91-105 @ called, was sent toa “finishing school” at Brighton.
Claude K. Deischer and Joseph L. Rabinowitz, “The
Back home, she continued to write stories.
Owl of Heinrich Khunrath: Its Origin and Signifi-
When she was sixteen, her father died, leaving
cance”, Chymia 3 (1950), 243-250 Hubert Dethier,
“Ciulio-Cesare Vanini et l’Amphithéatrum de Heinrich his daughter a small annual income. Her cousin,
Khunrath”, Tijdschrift voor de studie van de Verlicht- Reverend Algernon Godfrey Kingsford, an Angli-
ing en van het vrije denken 18 (1990), 263-298 @ Denis can clergyman, proposed to her, and they got
Duveen, “Notes on some alchemical books”, The engaged. Being involved at this time in the debate
Library, Series V, vol. 1 (1947), 56-61 @ idem, in: Bib- about women’s rights, linked to the issue of the
liotheca Alchemica et Chemica: An annotated cata-
position of married women, she asked her cousin to
logue of printed books on alchemy, chemistry and
promise her she could keep her freedom and her
cognate subjects in the library of Denis I. Duveen,
London: E. Weil, 1949, 319-321 # Umberto Eco, “Lo own money after marriage. He agreed, and in 1867
strano caso della Hanau 1609”, L’Esopo 40 (1988), 9- they did marry. Notwithstanding, after two days
12, 17-36 (also in French: Paris, 1990) @ Robert J.W. Anna panicked, having realized that she was
Evans, RudolfII and his World: A Study in Intellectual unable to meet her husband’s expectations. She
History 1576-1612, Oxford: Oxford University Press, returned to her mother’s house, where she stayed
1973, 213-215 @ John Ferguson, Bibliotheca Chemica,
until the birth of her daughter, Eadith. But she also
vol. 1, Glasgow, 1906, 462-464 @ Carlos Gilly, Johann
discovered she did not feel like raising a child, and Valentin Andreae 1586-1986, Amsterdam: In de
Pelikaan, 1986, 32-40 @ Hans Kangro, “H. Khunrath”, left hers in the care of her mother. In 1870 she
Dictionary ofScientific Biography, New York: Charles became a Roman Catholic and was bestowed
Scribner’s Sons, 1970-1980; vol. 7 (1973), 355f. the name Anna Mary Magdalen Maria Johanna.
Stanislas Klossowski de Rola, The Golden Game: From 1868 to 1870 she wrote stories in the Penny
Alchemical Engravings of the Seventeenth Century, Post.
London: Thames and Hudson, 1988, 29-44 Jacques
Kingsford did not want her life to be restricted to
van Lennep, Alchimie: Contribution a Vhistoire de l'art
the private sphere, as was expected of mothers. alchimique, 2nd ed., Brussels: Crédit Communal, 1985,
168-171 Joachim Telle, “Heinrich Khunrath”, in: Wishing to play a public role, she purchased and
Claus Priesner & Karin Figala (eds.), Alchemie: edited the periodical Lady’s Own Paper, in which

--- Page 88 ---
KINGSFORD 664
she strenuously supported feminism, vegetarian- ents itself as a defense of the idea of > reincarna-
ism, and the anti-vivisection movement. Through- tion and karma, but is primarily a Christian eso-
out her life, love for animals would be a major teric work — unlike most theosophical publications,
theme, always closely linked to feminism, religion which drew rather on Hinduism and/or Buddhism.
and spirituality. For her animals stood for Christ- Like > H.P. Blavatsky, Kingsford claimed that her
like goodness, purity and innocence. She person- writings were inspired by higher entities. The rela-
ally identified with them, and claimed she loved tionship between Kingsford, the young and beauti-
them more than children. Anyone hurting these ful seer, and the aristocratic grand old lady of
almost holy creatures was evil and a servant of Theosophy was tinged with coldness and punctu-
Satan, if not Satan himself. Cruelty to animals ated by squabbles. But even more than Blavatsky,
deserved to be punished; and whoever was guilty of Alfred P. Sinnett, another prominent member of the
this worst of all crimes should be destroyed, for Theosophical Society, became a strong opponent of
being as immoral as those who had crucified Kingsford. Not surprisingly, given his anti-Christ-
Christ. Kingsford thus entered upon a vigorous ian orientation and his focus on Eastern Wisdom,
crusade against the supreme evil of vivisection. he wrote a harshly critical review of The Perfect
Having realized that writing articles was not Way.
sufficient, she went as far as offering her own body On January 7, 1883, Anna was elected President,
to the most important physiologists of her time; and Maitland Vice-President, of the British Lodge
they could perform their medical experiments on of the Theosophical Society (renamed by Kingsford
her, in exchange for liberation of the animals in as “London Lodge of the Theosophical Society”),
their laboratories. Since her offer was not taken a position which they held until April 6, 1884.
seriously, she decided to fight the practice on an Indeed, over that short period Kingsford and Mait-
intellectual level, arguing that the prevailing mate- land had become more and more worried about the
rialistic, positivistic and male-dominated medical Theosophical Society’s move away from western
science should be transformed into a genuine spiri- Hermetic traditions and towards “Eastern occult
tual art of healing. In 1873 she went to Paris to teachings”. After a heated conflict, and a failed
study medicine, since in England women could not attempt at mediation by > Henry Steel Olcott and
qualify as doctors at the time. Her goal was to (allegedly) Mahatma Koot Hoomi, Kingsford and
prove that is was possible to take an M.D. (Medical Maitland resigned from the London Lodge of the
Degree) without sacrificing animals. T.S. On May 9, 1884, they founded the Hermetic
During her stay in Paris, from 1874 on she lived Society [+ Hermeticism and Hermetic Societies],
together with her “twin soul”, Edward Maitland devoted to the study of Platonism, > Gnosticism
(1824-1897), author ofa novel titled By and By: an and > Hermetism; they did so with the help of >
Historical Romance of the Future (1873). He was W.W. Westcott and > S.L. Mac-Gregor Mathers,
a widower and a distant relative of Anna’s hus- who would later, in 1888, found the > Hermetic
band, who did not object to his wife’s friendship (a Order of the Golden Dawn. The same year, Kings-
platonic one, for that matter). In 1880 Kingsford ford and Maitland edited extracts from the her-
took her M.D. degree, with a doctoral thesis which metic writings, under the title The Virgin of the
was published in English in 1881; it was titled The World. Maitland’s prefatory essay, “The Hermetic
Perfect in Diet, and dealt with vegetarianism and System and the Significance of its Present Revival”,
health. Together with Maitland, she then returned displays their strongly western esoteric leanings
to England, where she practiced as a physician in and belongs to their most interesting texts.
London, and had mostly women among her clients. The purpose of the Hermetic Society, Kingsford
Kingsford’s friendship with Maitland became claimed, was to investigate the nature and consti-
more and more important to her, and it was in col- tution of the human being, and to present a system
laboration with him that she developed her reli- of thought, along with a rule of life, which would
gious and spiritual ideas, and began to explore enable everyone to develop his/her higher intellec-
Theosophy. Kingsford was attracted to the > tual and spiritual potentialities. She stated that
Theosophical Society because she was looking for mysticism is science based on reason, and Chris-
a religion that combined > mysticism and science, tianity is one of the most important mystery reli-
a blend she had not found in the Roman Catholic gions, not least because it teaches that truth is only
Church. In September 1882 Kingsford and Mait- accessible through the illumination by the Divine
land both joined the Theosophical Society, and in Spirit dwelling within each human being’s own
the same year they wrote and published their book soul. Part of this wisdom was revealed to Anna by
The Perfect Way, or the Finding of Christ. It pres- her spiritual guides (or “illuminations”, as she

--- Page 89 ---
665 KIRCHBERGER
called them), whom only she was able to see and reprints, incl. Santa Fe: Sun Publishing Cy, 1993, and
hear, often during her sleep. Drawing upon the Kessinger repr.) @ Anna Kingsford & Edward Mait-
messages she thus received, she lectured on ancient land (eds.), The Virgin of the World by Hermes Tris-
megistus, London: George Redway, 1884 (2nd ed.,
philosophy, hermetic gnosis, Zoroastrianism,
Madras: P. Kailasam, 1885; repr. Minneapolis: Wiz-
Osirisism, Judaism and Christianity. ards Book Shelf, 1977; and Kessinger repr.).
Kingsford’s reliance on such spiritual guidance
eventually resulted in a disastrous end to her life. Lit.: Joy Dixon, Divine feminine: Theosophy and Fem-
The guides told her that she had been chosen to be inism in England, Baltimore/London: The John Hop-
the savior of animals; and Kingsford came to kins University Press, 2001, 29-30, 165-166, 238 @
believe that she was able, by magical means, to Joscelyn Godwin, The Theosophical Enlightenment,
Albany: SUNY Press, 1994, 245, 333-346, 362, 368
harm and kill the medical scientists and physiolo-
Aniela Jaffé, Religidser Wahn und schwarze Magie:
gists who were experimenting on animals — Paul Das tragische Leben der Anna Kingsford, Bonz: Fell-
Bert, Claude Bernard and Louis Pasteur in particu- bach, 1980; repr. Einsiedeln: Daimon Verlag, 2003 @
lar. She set out devoting much of her time to the Edward Maitland, Anna Kingsford: Her Life, Letters,
task of killing these men by the power of her Diary and Work (1895), 3rd ed., London, 1913
thought. And since Bert and Bernard actually died (2 vols.); repr. Kessinger, 2003.
around that time, she was confident she had suc-
ceeded. In 1887 she went to Paris in order to con- AMANDA KLUVELD
centrate her efforts on Pasteur, in the belief that
physical proximity would make her efforts more Kirchberger, Niklaus Anton, Baron
effective. But the many hours she spent in the rain von Liebisdorf, * 13.1.1739 Bern,
near the Pasteur Institute in Paris caused her to t+ 27.9.1799 Bern
catch a cold which developed into pulmonary con-
sumption. An attempt at recovering at the Riviera Member of the Grand Council of Bern from
proved fruitless and she returned to London, where 1776 until his death and simultaneously officer in
she died in 1888, with Edward Maitland at her the Swiss army. Member of several academic soci-
bedside. In her last hour she admitted being smitten eties and Government Committees. Well-read in
with remorse about the murders she believed she classical and contemporary philosophy and litera-
had committed. ture, in science (mostly agriculture), and particu-
Maitland has authored a voluminous biography larly in spirituality and western esoteric traditions.
of Kingsford, which he set out writing at the begin- Theosophical essays of his, notably on > Jacob
ning of the 1890s and whose final version in two Boehme, originally meant for publication, are no
big volumes (Anna Kingsford: Her Life, Letters, longer extant but documented by mention made in
Diary and Work) appeared in 1913, along with an his letters. Apart from a historical discourse on the
illuminating preface by Samuel H. Hart. This book civic courage displayed by the Swiss people (1771)
contains a wealth of information not on Kingsford and a treatise on the use of gypsum (plaster) in agri-
only, but more generally on the occultist movement culture (1771), he did not publish anything. His
in the second half of the r9th century. notoriety is due mainly to his correspondence and
to his role of go-between in the illuminist milieu.
Anna Kingsford, Beatrice: A Tale of the Early Chris-
For some time Kirchberger was a friend of Jean- tians, London, 1863 # River Reeds, London, 1866
Rosamunda, the Princess, London, 1868 # The Perfect Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778), with whom he
Way in Diet, London, 188 (repr. Kessinger) # “The exchanged letters (1762/65), and of the Swiss
Hermetic System and the Significance of its Present “femme de lettres” Julie Bondeli (1731-1778)
Revival”, in: Kingsford & Maitland (eds.), Virgin of whose spiritual-literary circle flourished in the
the World (see below), 9-30 @ Health, Beauty and the
1760s and 1770s. In 1779 he got acquainted with
Toilet, London, 1886 # Dreams and Dream Stories
~ Goethe. Around 1764 began a long friendship
(Edward Maitland, ed.), London, 1888 (electr. re-ed.
http://www.blackmask.com) # Clothed With the Sun: with > Johann Caspar Lavater. Kirchberger never
Being the Illuminations of Anna (Bonus) Kingsford met > Karl von Eckartshausen nor > Louis-Claude
(Edward Maitland, ed.), 1889 (repr. Santa Fe: Sun Pub- de Saint-Martin, but the bulk of his correspon-
lishing Cy, 1993; Kessinger repr.) @ The Credo of dence is with these two theosophers — from 1790
Christendom and other Addresses and Essays on Eso- with the former and from 1792 with the latter, and
teric Christianity, London, 1916 (and Kessinger repr.)
in both cases continuing until Kirchberger’s death.
Anna Kingsford & Edward Maitland, The Perfect
Among other IIlluminists, Kirchberger was also on
Way; or, the Finding of Christ (with Edward Mait-
land), London: Hamilton, Adams & Co., 1881; Rev. & friendly terms with Louis de Divonne 1765-1838),
enlarged ed.: London: Field & Tuer, 1887 (and many ~ Johann Heinrich Jung-Stilling and some disciples

--- Page 90 ---
KIRCHBERGER 666
of > Cagliostro, such as Jacob Sarasin (1742-1802) Exeter: William Roberts, 1863; reprinted as Corre-
and his friends. spondence between Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin and
Kirchberger, Baron de Liebisdorf, Pasadena/Covina
Some of the first testimonies of Kirchberger’s
CA: Theosophical University Press, 1949 # Robert
interest in spirituality and esotericism (which go
Amadou, “Correspondance (inédite) de Louis-Claude
back as early as 1764), are exchanges of ideas with de Saint-Martin avec Nicolas-Antoine Kirchberger
Johann Caspar Lavater on topics such as > animal et Francois-Victor Effinger (1798-1800)”, L’initiation
magnetism, physiognomy, and the state of the soul (Cahier de Documentation Esotérique Traditionnelle)
after death. Indeed throughout his life he would 34:3 (1960), 119-127; 35:1 (1961), 35-443 35:2
prove to be a man of an inquisitive turn of mind, (1961), 50-59.
conversant with the facts and phenomena of ani-
Lit.: Antoine Faivre, Kirchberger et I’Illuminisme du
mal magnetism, and more generally with all kinds dix-huitiéme siécle (Archives Internationales d’His-
of spiritual manifestations which at that time of toire des Idées 16), Den Haag: M. Nijhoff, 1966.
mystery-mongering were engaging attention in
Europe. But at the same time, he was on the look- ANTOINE FAIVRE
out for clues to the nature of their underlying laws.
This is why, in the 1780s, he gradually moved away Kircher, Athanasius, * 2.5.1602
from Lavater and increasingly turned his attention Geisa/Rohn, f 27.11.1680 Rome
to theosophy. He fell under the spell of Boehme
and steeped himself in the works of theosophers Kircher was one of the great universal scholars
such as > John Pordage, > Jane Leade and > of the 17th century. His life is well documented
Johann Georg Gichtel. in early biographies. His comprehensive education
His most arresting theosophic writings, often began with his theologian father’s homeschooling
blended with arithmosophic [> Number Symbol- in music, Latin, geography and mathematics. From
ism] and millenarian speculations, are centered on his tenth year, Kircher attended a series of Jesuit
the Divine Sophia. This strong emphasis brings him schools, firstly in Fulda, where he learnt Hebrew
closer to the Christianity of the Orthodox Church from a rabbi, then in Mainz. In 1618 he entered the
than a standard adherence to Protestantism would Jesuit order as a novice in Paderborn, where he
have it. These writings sometimes have an aroma of chiefly studied philosophy and physics. Owing to
quietism — he was an avid reader of Mme Guyon the Thirty Years War, he continued his studies in
(1648-1717) too. Indeed, while formally belonging 1621-1622 at Cologne. Following the completion
to the Reformed Church, he really considered him- of his studies, Kircher worked as a teacher of Greek
self a Christian of the so-called “inner Church”, a language and literature, initially at the Jesuit college
most common trait in people with theosophic lean- in Coblence, then at the “Humaniora” in Heiligen-
ings, along with that of political and religious stadt, and finally teaching mechanics at the Aschaf-
tolerance. Characteristic in this respect are his fenburg court of the Elector of Mainz, for whom
activities in championing political tolerance, while he also conducted cartographical surveys. In 1625
remaining sturdily engaged in combating the radi- Kircher began the prescribed four-year study of
cally anti-religious wing of the Aufklarung. theology at the Mainz college, where he simultane-
In his later years he experienced spiritual illumi- ously acted as professor of Greek. After his conse-
nations. Of these he has left us some brief but pow- cration as priest in 1628, and a third probationary
erful accounts, which he gave in his commentaries year as a Jesuit in Speyer, he was appointed profes-
to his extensive readings. In these descriptions he sor of ethics, mathematics, Hebrew and Syriac at
appears to stand in the wake of Boehme but they Wirzburg in 1629. His simultaneous application to
do not present any the less a certain originality. be a missionary to China — his first choice — was
On account of his epistolary activity and his gift unsuccessful. Two years later the Jesuits had to flee
for bringing kindred souls into contact with one Wirzburg due to the advance of Swedish troops.
another, Kirchberger gained the honour of being Travelling via Mainz, Speyer und Lyon, Kircher
hailed as a catalyst in the theosophic milieu of his reached Avignon where he taught the same subjects
time. He has remained one of the most attractive at the local Jesuit college, while pursuing scientific
figures of the Illuminist current. researches in astronomy and mathematics. Here he
met his most important patrons, the Provencal
Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin & Niklaus Anton Kirch-
astronomer Nicolas Claude Fabri de Peiresc and berger, Correspondance inédite (L. Schauer & A. Chu-
quet, eds.), Paris: Dentu, & Amsterdam: Van Backenes, Cardinal Francesco Barberini. These two also
1862; English edition: Mystical Philosophy and Spiri- ensured that in 1633 Kircher was not called to suc-
tual Manifestation (Edward Burton Penny, trans.), ceed Kepler as Court Mathematician at Vienna but

--- Page 91 ---
667 KIRCHER
was appointed professor at the Collegium Roma- stituted by a magical relation between the “lower”
num, founded by Ignatius of Loyola in 1551. and “higher” realms, especially > alchemy, Para-
Kircher taught mathematics, physics and oriental celsian medicine (e.g. > Paracelsus and - Fludd)
studies at Rome, which he would not leave for the and > magic (e.g. > Agrippa von Nettesheim). On
rest of his life, save for an extended stay on Malta the other hand, he describes in his works a series of
in 1637 and shorter journeys (as to Florence in esoteric sciences and traditions. He furthermore
1659). From here he corresponded with scholars bases his pansophy as a prelude to modern science
throughout Europe — some 763 correspondents are and technology on a theological concept of nature
known ~ and received numerous visits. After eight with evident esoteric presuppositions such as the
years Kircher was relieved of his teaching duties cosmological connection of all things.
and could henceforth devote himself entirely to his Magnetism was an early field of Kircher’s sci-
researches and collections, though more often with entific enquiry. His first publication, composed in
commissions from spiritual and secular lords rather Wurzburg, Ars magnesia (1631), investigates the
than independently. “nature”, “powers” and “effects” of the magnet
Kircher developed his claim to polyhistorical (de effectibus magnetis) in an empirical and specu-
knowledge in numerous and versatile writings, lative manner, following William Gilbert’s De mag-
publishing a total of 32 Latin folios, mostly exten- nete (1600) und Niccolo Cabaeo’s Philosophia
sive and richly illustrated. These works range from magnetica (1629). Kircher recognises in the mag-
the natural sciences (mathematics, magnetism, net a universal principle of inorganic and organic
astronomy, acoustics, optics, medicine) through nature, comparable to ~ Marsilio Ficino’s magia
the cultural history of mankind (with reference to naturalis, a bipolar duality of attraction and repul-
such monuments as Noah’s Ark or the Tower of sion. According to Kircher, all things and creatures
Babel), geography and geology, to philological and are subject to this principle, and so he investigates
etymological works (the decipherment of hiero- the universal effect of the magnetism of the earth,
glyphs, translation of Syrian and Coptic texts, Kab- the planets and the sun, the elements, plants and
balah). The diversity of these works is unified by a creatures (Kircher already speaks of magnetismus
pansophical logic, whereby everything in the world animalium {> Animal Magnetism] like Franz
and therefore all departments of knowledge are Anton Mesmer at the end of the 18th century), and
related to each other. In this respect, Kircher was its application in medicine, > music and love.
influenced by, among others, > Ramon Llull’s con- Kircher thereby relates the universal effect of mag-
cept of a combinatory Scientia generalis, which he netism to God, whom he understands as the mag-
displayed in his Ars magna sciendi sive combinato- net of all things. God holds everything together in
ria (1669/71). This pansophic initiative, on which harmony through his magnetic power. On the basis
Kircher’s correspondent Leibniz was also working of this theological and speculative view, Kircher
since his dissertation De arte combinatoria (1666), achieved by experimental means a series of practi-
consists in the construction of a totality of knowl- cal results and applications, for example in geo-
edge by relating a specific number of basic compo- magnetism.
nents according to combinatory and analogical Kircher wrote further books on magnetism, such
principles. This cosmological and encyclopaedic as Magnes sive de arte magnetica (1641, 1643,
logic rests on the assumption that everything is 1654) and Magneticum naturae regnum (1667),
linked to everything (omnia in omnibus) according and extended his method to optics (Ars magna lucis
to the principles of the unity of disparates (concor- et umbrae, 1646), acoustics and music (Musurgia
dia discors) and the chain of things (catena rerum). universalis, 1650; Phonurgia nova, 1673). In the
The polymathic diversity of Kircher’s works must field of optics, he identified the bipolar principle in
be understood as an inclusive project within the the duality of light and shadow and in the doctrine
encyclopaedic spirit of the Baroque. This Baroque of colours and rays, whereby the principle of
scholarship is typified by Kircher’s use of theore- reflection (described in his “Catoptrics”) acquired
tical and applied forms of knowledge, alongside a central importance. Here too Kircher achieved
their speculative and empirical, rational and eso- numerous applications, notably in astronomy and
teric counterparts. In consequence, Kircher’s stance microscopy, by developing instruments such as the
with respect to esoteric sciences remains ambiva- telescope, microscope and magic lantern. Kircher’s
lent. All attempts to recruit him for or against an works on acoustics and music ran along similar
esoteric viewpoint are in vain. On the one hand, lines in his identification of the bipolar principle of
Kircher appears critical towards those 16th- universal harmony with the relationship of conso-
century sciences which understood nature as con- nance and dissonance. By means of a mathematical

--- Page 92 ---
KIRCHER 668
cosmology based on numerical relations, witness This explains why Oedipus Aegyptiacus was
his work Arithmologia (1665), Kircher saw musi- concerned with much more than the decipherment
cal harmony realised on three planes: the heavenly of hieroglyphs. Its four volumes attempt a com-
plane of musica coelestis, the terrestrial of musica plete presentation of all so-called “Oriental wis-
mundana and the technical of musica instrumen- doms”. The title of the first volume mentions,
talis. Accordingly, Kircher described the Creation besides Egyptian wisdom, also Phoenician theol-
as a world organ upon which God plays as upon an ogy, Chaldaean > astrology, Hebrew Kabbalah,
instrument, an idea previously advanced by Kepler. Persian magic, Pythagorean mathematics, Greek
Again, Kircher found practical applications in this theosophy, Arab alchemy, and latin philology. The
field, such as the development of auditory and com- title of the second volume reiterates this compre-
munication devices, hearing aids, musical instru- hensive project of an “Encyclopaedia Aegyptio-
ments and not least a renowned composition rum” as an account of all “ancient Oriental
machine, which he presented to Duke August of wisdoms”, that is of the “Veterum Hebraeorum,
Wolfenbittel. Chaldaeorum, Aegyptiorum, Graecorum”. It is no
A second field of scholarly research opened up coincidence that Hebrew wisdom is the first topic
for Kircher after he encountered a manuscript on and clarifies Kircher’s understanding of the Kab-
Egyptian hieroglyphics at Speyer in 1628. He was balah, to which he devotes an extensive chapter in
particularly encouraged by Peiresc and Barberini this volume of Oedipus Aegyptiacus, and later in
to attempt the decipherment of hieroglyphics. His Arithmologia (1665). Kircher thereby not only
first written works on this subject were Prodromus entered the hermeneutical tradition of Renaissance
coptus sive Aegyptiacus (1636) and Lingua Aegyp- Christian Kabbalah [- Jewish Influences III] but
tiaca restituta (1643). When Pope Innocent X also transcended the 16th-century Jesuit interpre-
decided to erect an obelisk in the famous fountain tation of the Kabbalah, in which his student, col-
of the Piazza Navona, Kircher was engaged as a league and friend Kaspar Schott would follow him
consultant, which gave a fresh impetus to his deci- in Technica curiosa (1664). Like his Jesuit prede-
pherment of hieroglyphics. The results were his cessors, Kircher displayed ambivalance towards
works Obeliscus Pamphili (1650) and more im- Jewish mysticism, dismissing its magical elements
portantly, Oedipus Aegyptiacus in four volumes as superstition, and emphasising its theological and
(1652-1654), a comprehensive account of the arts, mystical elements as postive aspects. Kircher recog-
sciences, culture, religion and language of ancient nised a close relationship between the hieroglyphs
Egypt with comparative appendices on other ori- and the Hebrew characters, as understood in
ental cultures such as the Jewish and Chinese. Long the Kabbalah. This led him to conjecture that
before Jean Frangois Champollion’s decipherment “Hebrew wisdom” preceded “Egyptian wisdom”,
of the hieroglyphs in 1822, but rather in the spirit and was absorbed by the Egyptians: ‘This Kab-
of Iamblichus’ De mysteriis Aegyptiorum or Mar- balah was initially taken over by the first Egyptian
silio Ficino’s und > Giordano Bruno’s mythologi- patriarchs. Just as the Hebrews used letters and
sation of Egyptian wisdom into a_ primordial names, so the latter made concealed references by
wisdom, Kircher understood the hieroglyphs as various transformations of animals . . . Just as the
encoded symbols or signs which concealed hidden first kabbalists expressed themselves in a concealed
mysteries, as ‘enigmatic chimera of an ancient and symbolical fashion through letters, the Egyp-
wisdom’ (Oedipus Aegyptiacus). On this premise, tians cultivated this art through hieroglyphic pic-
Kircher first attempted to decipher the hieroglyphs tures’. Kircher understood the Hebrew letters as
in their relation to the Coptic and Greek alphabets. coded symbols, whose mysteries must be decoded.
Oedipus Aegyptiacus develops a comparative lin- For this purpose, the Kabbalah offered three decod-
guistics, involving Hebrew, Syrian and Chinese ing procedures: 1) Gematria (the calculation of
among other languages. From the perspective of the numerical value of the letters); 2) Notarikon
subsequent Egyptology, Kircher laboured under (understanding the words as a secret script or
the fundamental error of interpreting the hiero- shorthand); 3) Temurah (the combination of let-
glyphs as natural signs and thereby as symbols, ters). These were allegorical and exegetical proce-
rather than as phonetic values. Kircher’s interest in dures for ‘penetrating the hidden mysteries of Holy
the hieroglyphs must be understood as a function Scripture’ (in Sacra Scriptura arcana latentia)’.
of his pansophic quest, which led him to see in Kircher devoted most attention to the combination
them a primordial universal language, from which of letters, specifically because this corresponded to
all later languages and cultures derived. the Llullian method of universal knowledge. What

--- Page 93 ---
669 KIRCHER
Kircher here established as a kabbalistic procedure, reached progressive, scientific conclusions, such as
he would later develop as an encyclopaedic method the increase of the earth’s temperature towards its
in Ars magna sciendi (1669). Already by using the centre.
Kabbalah, he demonstrated the speculative con- Kircher realised his polymathic endeavour not
struction of a universal language through the com- only through his large folio books, but also
bination of the 22 Hebrew characters. Kircher through an extensive collection of natural speci-
calculated 1.124.000.727.777.607.680.000 possi- mens and cultural artefacts, the Museum Kirche-
ble permuations and explained this number as the rianum of the Collegium Romanum — thereby
sum not only of all possible words, but as the sum following a Baroque tradition in the presentation
of all things, and thus the aggregate of knowledge: of knowledge. It is principally composed of Al-
‘As many creatures are created by God, as there are phonso Donnini’s collection of antiquities, donated
combinations of these 22 letters’. In Kircher’s view in 1651, excavated Egyptian artefacts from the col-
the Kabbalah was a model for his polyglot and lection of Peiresc (partly illustrated in Obeliscus
encyclopaedic projects, as in Polygraphia (1663) pamphilius) as well as Chinese exhibits, donated by
and especially Ars magna sciendi (1669). In this the China missionary Martino Martin and which,
work the ars combinatoria is extended into a together with travel accounts, enabled Kircher to
method of scientia universalis,an encyclopaedia of write a book on China (China illustrata, 1667)
all arts and sciences (artium et scientiarum encyclo- without having visited the country himself. Kircher
paedia). With its combinatory method, the Kab- became curator of this museum, which he ex-
balah recognises the elementary, hidden design of panded with gifts from Jesuit brothers all over the
the world, the mundus combinatus. But by then, world and with instruments he himself had de-
Kircher was no longer operating with the 22 letters vised. The Museum Kircherianum became famous
of the Hebrew alphabet, but with an artificial throughout Europe, not least thanks to Kircher’s
alphabet of 3 x 9 (= 27) elements, derived from guided tours. In 1915 its contents were dispersed to
Llull’s nine dignitates, whose combination yielded other museums in Rome.
the totality of knowledge.
A complete index of Kircher’s books can be found in
Kircher’s works on magnetism, hieroglyphics
Gerhard Dunnhaupt, Personalbibliographien zu den
and Kabbalah clearly show how he blended eso- Drucken des Barock, 2nd ed., vol. 3, Stuttgart, 1991,
teric and theological thought with practical and 2326-2350 Hieronymus Ambrosius Langenmantel,
technical questions into an encyclopaedic plan. Fasciculus epistolarum ad. R.P. Athasasii Kircheri,
This integrative approach also characterises Kir- Augsburg, 1684 @ Selbstbiographie des P.A.K. aus der
cher’s astronomical, geographical and geological Gesellschaft Jesu, Trans. N. Seng, Fulda, 1901.
works, for instance Itinerarium exstaticum (1656/ Lit.: A. Behlau, Athanasius Kircher: Eine Lebensskizze,
57 and 1671) and Mundus subterranus (1665). Sci- Heiligenstadt, 1874 # Fred Brauen, “Athanasius Kir-
entific knowledge about the solar system as well as cher (1602-1680)”, Journal of the History of Ideas 43
the earth and its interior (botany, zoology, geogra- (1982), 129-134 @ idem, Universale Bildung im Barock:
Der Gelehrte Athanasius Kircher, Rastatt, 1981 ¢@
phy, mining engineering, geology, mineralogy, vul-
John Fletcher (ed.), Athanasius Kircher und seine Be-
canism etc) are based on theological and speculative ziehungen zum gelehrten Europa seiner Zeit (Wolfen-
premises. They are also presented by means of a nar- biutteler Arbeiten zur Barockforschung. Bd. 17),
rative fiction: in Itinerarium exstaticum Kircher (as Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1988 @ Paul Friedlander,
Theodidactus) is conducted by the angel Cosmiel in “Athanasius Kircher und Leibniz”, Atti della Pontifica
a dream across the solar system. Here Kircher fol- Academia Romana di Archeologia 13 (1937), 229-247
lows Tycho Brahe in presenting a geocentric world- ¢@ Joscelyn Godwin, Athanasius Kircher: A Renais-
sance Man and the Quest for Lost Knowledge, Lon-
picture, which he defends with ostensibly scientific
don: Thames and Hudson, 1979 @ Andreas Kilcher,
arguments against Galileo, Copernicus and Kepler. Die Sprachtheorie der Kabbala als asthetisches Para-
According to Kircher, all the divine powers of the digma, Stuttgart: J.B. Metzler, 1998 # Thomas Lein-
universe have condensed in the planet Earth. The kauf, Mundus combinatus: Studien zur Struktur der
interior of the earth consists of water and fire; barocken Universalwissenschaft am Beispiel Atha-
Kircher abseiled into the crater of Vesuvius in 1638, nasius Kirchers SJ] (1602-1680), Berlin: Akademie-Ver-
lag, 1993 @ idem., “Athanasius Kircher”, in: Grundrifs
in order to confirm the flaming and fluid condi-
der Geschichte der Philosophie, founded by Friedrich
tion of the interior. Inspired by imaginary travel Ueberweg, newly edited by Helmut Holzhey and Wil-
accounts, he held that the earth’s interior was helm Schmidt-Biggeman, vol. 4: Das Heilige R6misches
inhabited by salamander-like creatures. Alongside Reich Deutscher Nation. Nord- und Ostmitteleuropa,
these speculative and fabulous ideas, Kircher also Basle: Schwabe & Co., 2001, 269-290 @ P. Conor Reilly,

--- Page 94 ---
KIRCHER 670
Athanasius Kircher S]: Master of a Hundred Arts, then of Amsterdam, and that with their help he col-
1602-1680 (Studia Kircheriana, Bd. 1), Wiesbaden, lected the manuscripts and printed works that con-
Rome: Edizioni del Mondo, 1974 # Francois Secret, stituted the KD. Amsterdam was not only an
“Les jésuites et le kabbalisme chrétien”, Bibliotheque
important center for printing and marketing the lit-
d’Humanisme et Renaissance 20 (1958), 542-555:
erature of the so-called Lurianic Kabbalah, which
arose in Palestine in the 16th century and whose
ANDREAS B. KILCHER
main exponents were Isaak Luria (1534-72) and
his pupil Chaiim Vital (1542-1620), but also a cen-
Knorr von Rosenroth, Christian, ter of information on Sabbatianism, the messianic
* 15/16.7.1636 Alt-Raudten/Schlesien, movement of 1665/66 that was based on this type
t 4/8.5.1689 Grof-Albershof bei of Kabbalah. Sabbatai Zwi (1626-76) was recog-
Sulzbach nized as the Messiah by this movement, which was
also taken up enthusiastically in Amsterdam’s
Knorr von Rosenroth studied theology, philoso- circles of Christian millennarianists. Knorr von
phy, medicine, classical and modern languages at Rosenroth was certainly in contact with the Chil-
the University of Leipzig, from 1655 to 1660. In iast Petrus Serrarius (1600-1669), the most promi-
1659 he joined the “Deutschgesinnte Genossen- nent of the Christian Sabbatians, who proclaimed
schaft” of Philipp von Zesen (1619-1689). From the new Messiah in Holland and England.
1663 to 1666 he made an educational journey Knorr von Rosenroth was probably still in Ams-
through the Netherlands, France, and England. In terdam when he met > Franciscus Mercurius van
April 1663 he enrolled at the University of Leiden Helmont (1614-1689), the son of the Paracelsian
as a student of theology, and was later in Amster- physician > Joan Baptista van Helmont (1579-
dam and England, returning to Germany in 1666. 1644), whose Artzney-Kunst Knorr von Rosenroth
From 1667 onwards he lived in Sulzbach, near translated in 1683. Van Helmont introduced Knorr
Nuremberg, where he entered the service of the von Rosenroth in 1667 to Christian August in
Pfalzgraf Christian August (1622-1708). He Sulzbach, and was the most important collabora-
remained there until his death, working on numer- tor on the project of the KD, writing as its last part
ous works of natural philosophy and theology (e.g. Adumbratio kabbalae christianae (1684). As early
Erklarung uber die Gesichter der Offenbarung as 1667, their common interest in the Kabbalah led
S. Johannis, 1670) and translations (e.g. Boethius, to the Natur-Alphabet der Heiligen Sprache (1667),
De consolatione philosophiae, 1667; Giovanni an introduction to a language for the dumb derived
Battista della Porta, Magia Naturalis, 1680; and from Kabbala, to which Knorr von Rosenroth
Thomas Browne, Pseudodoxia epidemica, 1680). wrote the Introduction. It was not by chance that
From Sulzbach he corresponded with many impor- the philo-Semitic Pfalzgraf Christian August, a
tant European savants: in Germany these included convert to Catholicism in 1655, summoned to his
the Orientalist Johann Christoph Wagenseil (1633- court first a Catholic with Quaker leanings (Fran-
1705) and the philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leib- ciscus Mercurius van Helmont), and then a
niz (1646-1716), and in England, the philosopher Lutheran Hebraist (Knorr von Rosenroth), making
+ Henry More (1614-1687), the Hebraist John the latter a privy counselor and chancery director.
Lightfoot (1602-1675), and the Quaker George It is clear from the project of the KD that the Kab-
Keith (circa 1639-1716). balah was seen, in contrast to confessional differ-
Knorr von Rosenroth’s stay in Amsterdam was ences, as a mythical primordial and foundational
the decisive event for his intellectual biography. He doctrine that equally embraced the Jews and the
made there a number of important acquaintances Christian sects; the Jewish Kabbalists had always
who set him on his decades-long investigation of > known it, but, as Knorr von Rosenroth complains,
alchemy, nature-mysticism, and the kabbalah [> it was ‘until now almost completely ignored by
Jewish Influences]. This formed the basis for his the Christians’. As a document from the Jewish-
major work, Kabbala Denudata (2 vols., 1677- Christian era and therefore as prisca theologia, the
1684, hereafter KD). In Amsterdam he began by Kabbalah’s “restitution” was to override all con-
meeting many Jewish and Christian experts on fessional divisions and establish the harmony of
Kabbalah. There is a tradition that Knorr von religions.
Rosenroth studied Kabbalah with, among others, The KD is not simply a book, but rather the title
the Marranos Thomas de Pinedo (1614-1679) and of an entire library of Kabbalistic literature, which
Isaac de Rocamora (1601-1684), as well as with includes texts as different as a lexicon of basic Kab-
Meir Stern ( 1679), the Chief Rabbi first of Fulda, balistic concepts, translations from both older and

--- Page 95 ---
671 KREMMERZ
current literature of the Hebrew Kabbalah, and “Vorwort”, in: Kurtzer Entwurffdes Eigentlichen Natur-
documents of a contemporary debate over this lit- Alphabets der Heiligen Sprache, Sulzbach, 1667 ¢@
erature from the Christian theological point of Kabbala denudata, vol. 1, Sulzbach, 1677; vol. 2,
Frankfurt a. M., 1684 (repr. Hildesheim: Georg Olms,
view. Knorr von Rosenroth’s understanding of the
1998).
concept of Kabbalah rested especially on the Sefer
ha-Sohar (Book of Splendor). It has a central role in Lit.: Kurt Salecker, Christian Knorr von Rosenroth
the “library” of the KD, even to such an extent that (1636-1689), Leipzig: Meyer & Miller, 1931 # Andreas
the first volume of the work is subtitled “apparatus Kilcher, “Lexikographische Konstruktion der Kab-
in libri sohar”, and the second volume “restitutio bala: Die Loci communes cabbalistici der Kabbala
denudata”, Morgen-Glantz: Zeitschrift der Knorr vonlibri sohar”. With his concentration on the Sohar,
Rosenroth Gesellschaft 7 (1997), 67-125 @ Allison
Knorr von Rosenroth reached beyond the Christ-
Coudert, The Impact of the Kabbalah in the 17th Cen-
ian Kabbalists of the Renaissance — from — Pico tury, Leiden: Brill, 1999 @ Andreas Kilcher, “Synopse
della Mirandola (1463-94) to Johannes Pistorius zu Knorr von Rosenroths Kabbala denudata”, Morgen-
(1546-1608) — and made a direct connection with Glantz: Zeitschrift der Knorr von Rosenroth Gesell-
the type of Kabbalah whose literature he had schaft 10 (2000), 201-220.
acquired in Amsterdam: the Lurianic and Sabbat-
ian Kabbalah. In these texts, Knorr von Rosenroth ANDREAS B. KILCHER
found the Sohar sanctified as the mythical “Urtext”
of the Kabbala, for instance in Chaiim Vital’s Ez
Komenski, Jan Amos > Comenius,
Chaiim, or in Emek ha-Melech (Valley of the King,
Jan Amosprinted in Amsterdam, 1648) by Naphtali Bacha-
rach (first half of the 17th century), which are copi-
ously cited or translated in KD. For Knorr von Krebs, Niklaus > Cusa, Nicholas of
Rosenroth and van Helmont, the Sohar was
equally the Urtext of the Christian religion. Not
unconnected with Knorr von Rosenroth’s plan for Kremmerz, Giuliano (ps. of Ciro
the restitution of the Sohar was the printing of the Formisano), * 8.4.1861 Portici (Naples,
entire Hebrew text in 1684: a significant philologi- Italy), t 7.4. 1930 Beausoleil (France)
cal enterprise which Knorr von Rosenroth com-
pleted together with Jewish scholars. Ciro Formisano was born in Portici, near Naples,
Many of the texts in KD have played a large role in 1861. While working as a high school teacher
in the philosophy and esotericism of the 18th and and left-wing journalist, he became involved in the
19th centuries. In philosophy, it was especially important occult [> occult / occultism] and Mar-
Sha’ar ha-Shamaiim (Gate of Heaven) by Abraham tinist [> Martinism: Second Period] underground
Cohen Herreras (circa 1570-163 5/39), translated of Naples and was befriended by the older occult
by Knorr von Rosenroth, that was drawn into the teacher Giustiniano Lebano (1832-1909). Through
debate over Spinoza’s pantheism. In esotericism, Lebano, Formisano then met Leone Caetani (1869-
among other things the three Sohar extracts trans- 1935), a well-known scholar of Islam and a mem-
lated in KD (Sifra de-Zniuta [Book of the Con- ber of the Italian parliament, who was also the
cealed], Idra Rabba [Great Assembly], and Idra leader of a quasi-masonic Egyptian Order, and a
Zuta [Lesser Assembly]) were translated by > neo-pagan critic of Christianity.
MacGregor Mathers (1854-1918) and published in After travels in France and elsewhere, Formisano
1887 under the title The Kabbalah Unveiled, play- became a full-time occult teacher in 1896, under
ing a major role in esoteric > Freemasonry. The the pseudonym of Giuliano Kremmerz. He also
same applies to the remarkable alchemical treatise edited the occult magazines I] mondo segreto (The
Esch mezaref (Purifying Fire), a combination of the Secret World, 1897-98), La Medicina Ermetica
Kabbalistic doctrine of the Sefirot with > alchemy (The Hermetic Medicine, 1899-1900); and later
and ~> astrology, whose Hebrew original is lost Commentarium (1910-1911). In 1896 Kremmerz
and which only survives in the Latin quotations established an occult order of his own, known as
in KD. The text was translated from this source the Fraternity of Miriam (or Myriam), and placed
into English in 1714 ‘by a lover of Philaletes’, and it initially under the authority of Caetani’s Egypt-
reappeared to play a role in the esoteric Freema- ian Order, and later (after Caetani broke with
sonic circle around > William Wynn Westcott Kremmerz and left Italy for Canada) of other
(1848-1925), who republished the translation in mysterious “Egyptian” secret Masters, whose
1894. actual existence has never been proved. While the

--- Page 96 ---
KREMMERZ 672
Fraternity ostensibly devoted itself exclusively to a (centering on a whole system of spermatophagy)
system of magical healing (“Isis magic”), its inner have to be performed at dates carefully selected
circle was also instructed in a different system of according to an astrological chart and preceded by
“Osiris magic”. periods of strict fasting.
Divisions within Kremmerz’s school started dur- Although such techniques (and their endless
ing his own lifetime; he withdrew gradually from variations in contemporary groups) may appear
public teaching in the r9r1os and, disappointed paradoxical, in the systems based on Kremmerz’s
with his disciples whom he still occasionally met, thinking (unlike the > Aleister Crowley counter-
passed the last two decades of his life firstly on the parts) there is no libertinism. In fact, the strictest
Italian Riviera, and later in Beausoleil, France. A chastity is required between one “operation” and
dozen contemporary rival organizations still claim the other, and the need to consider astrological con-
Kremmerz’s heritage. ditions makes the performance of the “operations”
Most of Kremmerz’s writings were published a not too frequent event. The aim of these lifetime
posthumously. There are no quarrels about his efforts is, ultimately, to achieve true immortality.
“Isis magic”, a magical healing system which An immortal soul, according to Kremmerz, is not
identifies the Virgin Mary with the Minerva Med- granted to everybody, but can only be painfully
ica and other healing goddesses. Spirit, according achieved by applying appropriate techniques.
to Isis magic, is divine and immortal; all human
problems come from matter, and can only be solved La Scienza dei Magi, 3 + 1 vols. (Ugo Danilo Cisaria,
ed.), Rome: Edizioni Mediterranee, 1974-1976 @ II
when spirit again becomes independent from it.
Mondo Segreto, 1896-1899 (2 vols.), repr. Viareggio:
Kremmerz was familiar with > New Thought and
Rebis, 1985 # La Medicina Ermetica, 1899-1900, repr.
Christian Science, and his denial of matter echoed Florence: Nardini, 1983 # Commentarium, 1910-
the latter, while the use of magnetic healing tech- t911 (2 vols.), repr. Firenze: Nardini, 1983 # Giuliano
niques was drawn largely from the former. He Kremmerz (but see text on questioned authorship),
added an occult explanation of illness, however, Corpus philosophorum totius magiae (3 vols.), Milan:
derived from his mentor Lebano, claiming that a Edizioni Agape, 1974-1975 @ Vittorio Fincati, Lo
sputo della luna: Documenti sulla magia sessuale, vols.
plethora of malicious spirits and demons steal from
3, 4 and 5, Libreria Editrice “Letture S . . . consigliate”
humans the vital fluid which is essential for their (sic): Bassano del Grappa (Vicenza), 1998-1999.
health. Putting together the power of several initi-
ates in a magical brotherhood, as weil as invoking Lit.: Jah-Hel, La Pietra Angolare Miriamica: Storia
angels, benevolent spirits and gods, is regarded as documentata della Fratellanza di Miriam di Giuliano
essential if the fluid stolen by the dark forces is to Kremmerz, Viareggio: Rebis, 1989 # Massimo Intro-
be recovered. vigne, I! cappello del mago, Milan: Sugar Co., 1980,
301-308 @ idem, “De l’hypertrophie de la filiation: Le
What exactly “Osiris magic” was is less clear.
milieu kremmerzien en Italie”, ARIES (Association
Documents have been circulating privately for pour la Recherche et I’Information sur |’Esotérisme),
decades, and some were published in the 1970s and Symboles et Mythes dans les mouvements initiatiques
1990s within the framework of the ongoing quar- et ésotériques (X VII°-XX® siécles): Filiations et em-
rels between rival groups claiming Kremmerz’s her- prunts, Paris: Arché — La Table d’Emeraude, 1999,
itage. Other groups have denied that these texts 148-156.
represent Kremmerz’s original teachings, and the
present status of scholarly research does not allow MASSIMO INTROVIGNE
for a precise reconstruction of what he taught on
these matters. If one believes the texts published Labrunie, Gérard > Nerval, Gérard de
and the practice of most (although not all) contem-
porary groups claiming some sort of “apostolic Lacuria, Abbé Paul-Frangois-Gaspard,
succession” from Kremmerz’s immediate disciples, * 6.1.1806 Lyon (RhOéne), t 3.3.1890
“Osiris magic” includes two branches, “avatar Oullins (Rhéne)
magic” and a technique of internal alchemy known
as “separation”. The third of six children of a couple of gold-
“Avatar magic” teaches how to substitute one smithery and jewelry workers, Paul was educated
soul for another in the same human body. “Separa- at the seminary of Oullins. He enrolled in 1826, in
tion” teaches how to separate and purify the solar the company of Charles Ozanam (1804-18882), at
body from the other three human elements (physi- the moment when death struck the majority of his
cal, astral, and mental). In order to achieve the family. After teaching in the “experimental” col-
“separation”, a number of sex magic operations leges of Saint-Nizier and Oullins, near Lyon, of

--- Page 97 ---
673 LANZ VON LIEBENFELS
which Lacuria was co-founder, he was ordained 1899. Lacuria’s appearance, like an ancient sage
priest in 1836. While at the seminary, whose disci- with a long white beard, inspired a lithograph of
pline he found irksome, the future priest was Odilon Redon (1840-1916), Le Liseur.
enthused by Lamennais’ (1782-1854) project for
reforming the Church, and was one of the chief Les harmonies de 'Etre exprimées par les nombres:
supporters in Lyon of liberal Catholicism. Through Les lois de l’ontologie, de la psychologie, de l’éthique,
de l’esthétique et de la physique expliquées les unes par
the agency of his brother Louis, a painter, he tried
les autres et ramenées a un seul principe, Paris: Comp-
to obtain drawings by Ingres (1780-1867) for the toir des imprimeurs, 1847, 2 vols.; new ed. by René
journal L’Avenir, founded in 1830. The experience Philipon, Paris: Chacornac, 1899.
of this journal was decisive in forming Abbé Lacu-
ria’s social philosophy, aspiring to unite God and Lit.: Robert Amadou (ed.), “Vabbé Paul Lacuria”,
liberty within modern societies; he was also Atlantis nos. 314, 315, May-June, July-Aug. 1981 ¢
Jean-Pierre Brach, La symbolique des nombres, Paris:
influenced by the first socialists, Saint-Simon
Presses universitaires de France, 1994, 113-114 @
(1760-1825) and Fourier (1772-1838), who had
Franck P. Bowman, Le Christ romantique, Droz,
tried to restore the lost unity of society in union 1973, 214-217 # Raymond Christoflour, Propheétes du
with the spiritual life. The responsible behavior of XIX® siécle, Paris: La Colombe, 1954, 67-91 no. 317,
the Lyon workers during the revolution of 1831 Nov.-Dec. 1981 @ Marie-France James, Esotérisme,
confirmed Lacuria in his choices. He dreamed of a occultisme, Franc-Maconnerie et christianisme aux
social body kept in equilibrium by the inner regen- XIX et XX® siécles, Paris: Nouvelles Editions Latines,
198r.
eration of its members, and thenceforth began the
writing of his life’s work, Les harmonies de l’Etre
JEAN-PIERRE LAURANT
exprimées par les nombres (The Harmonies of
Being expressed by Numbers). As the title indi-
Lanz, Adolf Josef > Lanz voncates, it is the analogies suggested by the symbolic
relationships between the three first numbers in the Liebenfels, Jorg
Trinity that form the basis for a real understanding
of the cosmos, made perceptible through the corre- Lanz von Liebenfels, Jorg (Adolf Josef
sponding geometrical figures (circle, ellipse, cone), hanzy* 19:7.1874 Vienna, 7 22-40195.4
thus allowing a bridge to be built between science Vienna
(the laws of mathematical progression) and faith
(the revelation of the Trinity). Lacuria’s approach Cistercian monk, journalist and author, creator
moved, in particular, towards the inverse analogy of a racial-esoteric doctrine known as -> Arioso-
of the Greek Fathers’ “apophatic” theology. The phy, and founder of the Ordo Novi Templi (ONT),
subtitle further reveals his intentions: ‘the laws of a Christian gnostic order based on a cult of Aryan
ontology, psychology, ethics, aesthetics, and phy- race. Born Adolf Josef Lanz, the son of a Viennese
sics, explained through one another and reduced to schoolmaster, he developed a fascination for reli-
a single principle’. The work, presented in 1844 gious and chivalrous orders at an early age. In 1893
under the pseudonym of “Abbé Gaspard”, was he entered the noviciate at Heiligenkreuz Abbey
quite poorly received by the clerical world to which near Vienna as Frater Georg. In 1897 he took
it was addressed. Two years later the College of solemn vows, and in 1898 he became seminary
Oullins was dissolved, and the second edition of teacher. From 1894 to 1899 he published numer-
Harmonies . . ., signed P. F. G. Lacuria, appeared in ous articles on the history of the abbey and the Cis-
1847 from the Comptoir des Imprimeurs in Paris. tercian order. Lanz interpreted a tombstone relief
Here the Abbé settled, making a scant living from showing a nobleman treading upon a beast as an
lessons but surrounded by a circle of Lyonnais allegory of the dualistic struggle of good and evil
artists and thinkers, among whom the dominant and developed heterodox ideas concerning the bes-
personality was the painter Chenavard (1808- tial origin of evil. In 1899 he left the abbey and
1895). A few years after the death of the “new abandoned the noviciate. From 1900 to 1905 he
Pythagoras”, René Philipon (1869-1936), who published polemical writings against the Jesuit
published the collection “Bibliotheque Rosicruci- influence in the Catholic church; he took up
enne” with Chacornac, recognized in a photograph contact with nationalist Pan-German and Social
of Lacuria an old man who had appeared to him in Darwinist circles (cf. contributions to Theodor
a dream. Philipon obtained a manuscript of Har- Fritsch’s Hammer and Ludwig Woltmann’s Poli-
monies ... which the Abbé had corrected over the tisch-Anthropologische Revue); he undertook stud-
years in response to criticisms, and published it in ies and published journal articles on anthropology,

--- Page 98 ---
LANZ VON LIEBENFELS 674
archaeology and ancient history relating to the the dark races of bestial origin. The ONT adopted
Aryan race. In 1902 he assumed a doctoral title and Cistercian forms of liturgy, dress and hierarchy and
hyphenated “Liebenfels” (a noble Swiss family) to was open to all males subject to Aryan racial
his name (later, in 1910, Lanz adopted the style qualification. Its purpose was to act as a mutual
“Lanz von Liebenfels”). benefit society for racially conscious Austrian
In 1905, Lanz combined his theological training Germans, promote Aryan beauty and _ healthy
with the new life sciences to articulate his religious lifestyles, and encourage rural and overseas coloni-
doctrine of “theozoology”. This variety of euhe- sation. In 1907 Lanz von Liebenfels acquired Burg
merism held that the ancestors of the Aryan race Werfenstein, a picturesque castle on the River
were gods. As earlier, superior forms of life (Theo- Danube near Grein, Upper Austria, as the archpri-
zoa), these god-men were quite distinct from the ory of the order. Before the outbreak of the First
race of beast-men (Anthropozoa), descended from World War, members were drawn from the armed
a pygmy called Adam. The Fall consisted in the forces, civil service and professions.
miscegenation of these god-men with the beast- Lanz von Liebenfels elaborated a full ONT
men, leading to the atrophy of their marvellous liturgy with an order rule, order of service, hymns,
powers and the development of the mixed races of prayers and psalms for his racial religion of “Ario-
historical times. Lanz attributed all sin and suffer- Christianity”. Divine office and mass were held at
ing in the world to this racial interbreeding, Werfenstein, and wealthy followers founded new
allegedly institutionalized in bestial sex-cults in the ONT houses. On 9.2.1914, a second ONT priory
ancient world. He claimed that Christ, an Aryan was founded at Hollenberg near Aachen. In 1918,
god-man, had come to proclaim the cult of pure Lanz von Liebenfels moved to Hungary; in 1919
race but was opposed by racial inferiors resisting he was twice captured by communist insurgents
the revival of the cult of racial purity. Lanz von but escaped with his life; and in 1921 he was de-
Liebenfels saw the Arian heresy as the original ported from Germany. On 15.10.1925 he acquired
racial doctrine of Christianity and declared that the Marienkamp-Szt. Balazs ONT archpriory near
Wulfila’s Gothic Bible contained the key to “Ario- Lake Balaton with the aid of Hungarian ONT
Christianity”. He further claimed that the history brothers. On 31.12.1927 he founded the Staufen
of the medieval Church recorded the struggle of ONT priory at Dietfurt near Sigmaringen; on
reformers (chiefly the monastic and military orders 8.11.1928 the Hertesburg ONT presbytery near
of Benedictines, Cistercians, Templars and Teu- Prerow, Germany on the Baltic coast; on 4.9.1937
tonic Knights) to revive the cult, while the modern the Szt. Kereszt ONT presbytery near Pilisszentk-
world traced the political triumph of racial inferi- ereszt in northern Hungary; and on 4.9.1938 the
ors. Lanz von Liebenfels claimed that a universal Petena ONT archpriory near Waging in Bavaria
program of segregation, eugenic selection and was founded by Georg Hauerstein junior. The
genocide could restore the Aryans to their original order received some 300-400 brothers from its
divine status. He also borrowed esoteric racial foundation until the 1930s.
ideas from The Secret Doctrine of > Helena Lanz von Liebenfels assimilated many esoteric
Blavatsky, incorporating them in his own dualist ideas into his manichaean-dualist interpretation of
interpretation of holy scripture: Bibeldokumente Christianity, coining the term Ariosophy for his
I-III (1907-1908). This exegesis is later elaborated doctrine by r915. He was attracted to the Monism
in his monumental fifteen-volume Bibliomystikon of Ernst Haeckel and speculated on the esoteric tra-
(1930-1935). dition of > Naturphilosophie, describing the neo-
Lanz von Liebenfels launched his own magazine Platonic world-soul and its manifestation as energy
Ostara (1905-1918), as a “racial-economic” mag- in all matter. Lanz von Liebenfels saw Aryan blood
azine to apply anthropological findings in order to as a metaphysical force, whose ennoblement could
combat the revolt of inferiors and protect the noble be assisted by eugenic breeding and the ONT sacra-
European race. Addressing the ascendancy of ments. During the First World War, he used >
subject nationalities in the Habsburg empire, astrology and millenarian prophecy (Joachim of
Ostara opposed liberalism and parliamentary gov- Fiore) to predict the outcome of the war. During the
ernment, and championed male rights against 1920s he adopted astrological ideas (Platonic year)
women’s emancipation. Already in 1900 Lanz von to periodize history: from 480-1210 society was
Liebenfels had founded his own religious order, the ruled by spiritual and chivalrous orders; the rise of
Ordo Novi Templi (ONT), to propagate his racial the masses characterized the period 1210-1920
religion based on this gnostic dualism between the with the spread of towns, capitalism, democracy,
blond Aryan-Germanic races of divine origin and nationalism and communism; the next period

--- Page 99 ---
675 LAVATER
1920-2640 would witness the revival of hierarchies. National Socialism. He continued writing his litur-
Lanz von Liebenfels hailed the right-wing dictator- gical and doctrinal books for the ONT, first in
ships in Spain, Italy and Hungary during the 1920s Hungary, then in Switzerland, returning by 1938 to
as precursors of this global transformation. Austria where he remained throughout the Second
By 1925 Lanz von Liebenfels summarized Arios- World War. With the suppression of religious sects
ophy as a doctrine of “pan-psychic” energy, identi- during the Third Reich, the ONT was dissolved.
cal with God, which animated the whole universe From 1947 to 1952 Lanz von Liebenfels resumed
but found its highest manifestation in the blond- limited ONT activity and publishing, receiving the
haired, blue-eyed Aryan. Ariosophy used such eso- sacraments of the Catholic church before his death
teric sciences as palmistry, astrology, heraldry, in 1954.
name-kabbalism and numerology to study the spir-
itual and physical differences between the “blonds” “Anthropozoon biblicum”, Vierteljahrsschrift fiir Bi-
belkunde 1 (1903), 307-316, 317-355, 429-469; 2and “darks”. Borrowing ideas of > Guido von List,
(1904), 26-60, 314-337, 395-412 @ Theozoologie oder
Lanz von Liebenfels regarded coats of arms and
Die Kunde von den Sodoms-Afflingen und dem Gét-
names as symbolic hieroglyphs recording the terelektron, Vienna: Moderner Verlag, 1905 # Lanz-
karma of Aryan families through the centuries. Liebenfels Bibeldokumente, I. Folge, Berlin: Paul
Between 1925 and 1933 Lanz von Liebenfels col- Zillmann, n.d. (Heft 1: Der Affenmensch der Bibel;
laborated with the publisher Herbert Reichstein Heft 2: Die Theosophie und die assyrischen “Men-
(1892-1944) to present Ariosophy as a popular schentiere”; Heft 3: Die Archaologie und Anthropolo-
gie und die assyrischen Menschentiere) Grundrifs der
occult science of racial characterology and per-
ariosophischen Geheimlehre, Oestrich i. Rheingau:
sonal divination. Reichstein’s monthly periodical Herbert Reichstein, 1925 @ Das Buch der Psalmen
Zeitschrift fur Menschenkenntnis und Menschen- teutsch, Disseldorf-Unterrath: Herbert Reichstein,
schicksal (later Ariosophie) published articles by a 1926 @ Bibliomystikon oder Die Geheimbibel der
wide circle of German occultists, including Ernst Eingeweihten, ro vols., Pforzheim: Herbert Reichstein,
Issberner-Haldane (1886-1966), a Berlin palmist; 1930-1935.
Frodi Ingolfson Wehrmann (1889-1945), an astro-
Lit.: Wilfried Daim, Der Mann, der Hitler die Ideen
loger; Robert H. Brotz, a graphologist; Rudolf
gab, Vienna: Hermann Bohlau, 1985 # Nicholas
John Gorsleben (1883-1930), the author of books Goodrick-Clarke, The Occult Roots of Nazism: Secret
on “Aryan mysteries”; and Gregor Schwartz- Aryan Cults and Their Influence on Nazi Ideology. The
Bostunitsch (1883-2), an anti-Semitic and anti- Ariosophists of Austria and Germany, 1890-1935,
masonic conspiracy theorist. This publishing New York: New York University Press, 2004 @ Ekke-
activity was supported by courses, public lectures hard Hieronimus, Lanz von Liebenfels: Eine Bibli-
ographie, Toppenstedt: Uwe Berg, 1991 @ Rudolf J.
and summer schools, while Lanz von Liebenfels
Mund, Jorg Lanz v. Liebenfels und der Neue Templer
retained the spiritual leadership of the ONT, and Orden, Stuttgart: Rudolf Arnold Spieth, 1976.
reissued a new series of Ostara magazine from
1927 to 1931 (including a new, serialized edition of NICHOLAS GOODRICK-CLARKE
Theozoologie). From 1933, Lanz von Liebenfels
published a major series of pamphlets (Ariomanti-
sche Biicherei, Luzerner Briefe, Briefe an meine Lavater, Jonann.Caspar,” 15, 05.1744
Freunde), intended only for ONT circulation. His Airich fe2s0. 160% Zurich
historical survey of “ario-Christian” mysticism
attempted to recruit many major figures in the eso- A Swiss Lutheran minister and theologian,
teric tradition, including > Hildegard of Bingen, Lavater is mostly known as the founder of the
Gertrude the Great, Mechtilde of Magdeburg, “modern” science of physiognomy. As a poet he
Meister Eckhart, Jan van Ruysbroeck, Thomas a acquired some notoriety by his Schweizer Lieder
Kempis, > Jacob Boehme, Angelus Silesius, Niko- (1767). A prolific author, he wrote nearly 130
laus von Zinzendorf, ~ Emanuel Swedenborg, J.B. works (mostly religious books, sermons, canticles,
Kerning, Carl von Reichenbach, > Eliphas Lévi a diary, and Christian handbooks with moral
and Helena Blavatsky. Lanz von Liebenfels also advice). His correspondence amounts to more than
dedicated a special study to the Austrian medium 11.000 letters exchanged with people belonging to
and Christian visionary > Jakob Lorber (1800- practically all social milieus, from simple workers
1864). up to sovereigns in Europe (most of that corre-
Initially enthusiastic at Hitler’s seizure of power spondence is accessible at the Zentralbibliothek of
in Germany, Lanz von Liebenfels was soon disap- Zurich). He was, among other people of great
pointed by the plebeian and demagogic aspects of fame, a friend of -> Goethe, who contributed a

--- Page 100 ---
LAVATER 676
chapter on the skulls of animals to his book on cessfully cured his wife by means of magnetism. He
physiognomy (see further below). Lavater had a went as far as to believe in the possibility of a mag-
taste for religious polemics. He took up contact netic rapport with God Himself.
with enlightened thinkers of all kinds, without any In 1793 Lavater came under the influence of the
distinction of religious or intellectual tendencies — Illuminists of the so-called “Northern School” of
pietists, Moravian Brothers, rationalists, mystics, Copenhagen (in particular of their leader Prince
Illuminists, theosophers — but he refused to be Karl von Hessen-Kassel), who practised a form of
counted as a member of any movement, school or Christian theurgy. That year he went to Copen-
sectarian association. Because of his eclecticism, hagen and took part in their practices. Under their
his interest in science and religion, and his search influence, he even became for some time inclined to
for a synthesis between faith and reason, Lavater believe in metempsychosis [> Reincarnation]. His
can be considered a representative of the cultural interest in all kinds of spiritual manifestations and
cosmopolitanism typical of the 18th century. He materialisations of the spiritual increased over the
contributed more than anyone else in his period to years. For example, he believed that the Apostle
the diffusion of a kind of Christian > mysticism John had never died, and during the year 1794
strongly tinged with theosophy. As a matter of fact, Lavater thought that John might possibly visit him
he can be considered one of the main popularizers in Zurich, which caused him to become the victim
of the general movement known as > IIluminism. of some impostors (like Rudolf Hermann).
Lavaters faith, blended with > pietism and toler- In Strasburg, where he was invited by Cagliostro
ance towards other confessions, put Christ in the in 1781, at the same occasion he got in touch with
foreground as the archetype of humankind and ~ Freemasonry, thereby becoming acquainted with
Mediator between God and Man. That emphasis a number of freemasons (of Strasburg and else-
gave rise to an uncompromising Christ-centered where) with strong esoteric leanings, such as >
conception of mankind. Although a Protestant, he Willermoz and ~ Saltzmann. Freemasonry con-
had some Catholic leanings and was oftentimes tributed to opening him up to a great number of
suspected by people of his Church of practicing a other theosophers outside the pale of Freemasonry
kind of crypto-catholicism. His ideas about the proper, such as > Jung-Stilling, > Eckartshausen,
unity of the cosmos and his belief in universal sym- Kirchberger, > Saint-Martin, and to the works
bolism brought him close to the Christian theoso- of + Swedenborg. His brother Diethhelm, and by
phers. Preoccupied with messianic expectations, he the same token he himself, albeit indirectly, par-
envisaged the millenium as a theological reality ticipated as an observer in the Convent of Wil-
and awaited the manifestation of a mystical Chris- helmsbad (1782), aimed at defining the aims and
tianity which would present itself as an “inner organization of European Freemasonry. But he
Church”. Lavater’s apologetics, his proselytism, never joined any lodge, because the very principle
and his militant Christosophy, oftentimes caused of a secret society seemed to him to be incompati-
him to become estranged from his friends — includ- ble with the principles of Christianity as he saw
ing Goethe. them. And it is not surprising that he took up arms
Like many of his contemporaries, Lavater was against the Bavarian > Illuminaten of Adam Wei-
eager for miracles, strongly interested in theurgy shaupt as soon as he became aware of what their
and felt a loathing for mere abstract speculation. actual plans were all about.
He was always prone to complement his pietistic Among the most successful works of Lavater
Christianity with mystical elements. Convinced is his series of essays entitled Aussichten in die
that the human soul had a power of precognition Ewigkeit (Prospects for Eternity; 1768-1778), in
and divination, he also frequented some thauma- which he tried to foray into the mysteries of the
turgists of the time like Johann Joseph Gassner, Graf destiny of mankind and of afterdeath life. His most
Joseph von Thun, Karl von Hessen-Kassel and - famous one, a presentation of and a plea for the sci-
not least --> Cagliostro, whom he met two or three ence of physiognomy, is Physiognomische Frag-
times in Strasbourg, between 1781 and 1783. mente zur Beforderung der Menschenkenntnis und
Around 1784, Lavater became interested in the Menschenliebe (Physionomic Fragments, to foster
+ animal magnetism of Franz Anton Mesmer. He Knowledge and Love of Human Beings; 1775-
exchanged ideas on this topic with his friend > 1778). The art of judging the human character and
Kirchberger and many other people. In Lavater’s of foretelling a person’s fate from the features of the
opinion, magnetism was closely linked to the face had long been part and parcel of the so-called
“sixth sense” with which the prophets of the Old occult sciences. In accord with the idea of > corre-
Testament had been endowed. Lavater himself suc- spondences between microcosm and macrocosm,

--- Page 101 ---
677 LAW
physiognomony is based upon the idea that the Ursula Caflisch-Schnetzler, “Lavater’s Aussichten in
very material form of any being is already, in itself, die Ewigkeit in Briefen an Johann Georg Zimmer-
a “language”: the expression of what this being is mann”, in: Helmut Hozhey and Simone Zurbuchen
(eds.), Alte Locher — neue Blicke; Ziirich im 18.
in its innermost core. The Physiognomische Frag-
Jahrhundert: Aussen- und Innenperspektive, Zurich,
mente assured Lavater an ever growing European
1998, 203-216 @ Antoine Faivre, Kirchberger et I’Illu-
audience. For him it was not just a psychological minisme du X VIII® siecle (International Archives of the
tool, but also a kind of hymn to God’s glory, History of Ideas 16), Den Haag: M. Nijhoff, 1966
because correspondences as he understood them (Lavater’s name appears almost on every page) @ idem,
were necessarily reflective of a universal web in “Johann Caspar Lavater, Charles de Hesse et l’Ecole du
which God, man and nature intertwine. Not sur- Nord”, in: A. Faivre, Mystiques, théosophes et Illu-
minés au siecle des Lumiéres (Studien und Materialien
prisingly, that work came in for its share of criti-
zur Geschichte der Philosophie 20), Hildesheim:
cism from people (e.g. the psychologist Georg G. Olms, 1976, 175-190 @ Olivier Guinaudeau, Jean-
Christoph Lichtenberg) prone to see in Lavater Gaspard Lavater: Etudes sur sa vie et sa pensée
merely a kind of magician or visionary with a free- jusqu’'en 1786, Paris: F Alcan, 1924 Christian
wheeling imagination. Janetzky, “Lavaters magischer Glaube”, in: Abhand-
When Ziirich was invaded by the French, lungen zur Deutschen Literaturgeschichte (Franz
Muncker zum 60. Geburtstage), Munich, 1916, 65-82Lavater was arrested and deported to Basel. Upon
@ Anne-Marie Jaton, Entre le “réalisme” et la “vo-
his return to Ziirich, he was wounded by a bullet
yance”: Lavater et la littérature francaise, Pisa: Univer-
shot by a drunken French soldier and died after sita degli Studi di Pisa, 1984 eadem, Johann Caspar
nearly two years of suffering. Such a death stirred a Lavater: Philosoph-Gottesmann-Schopfer der Physiog-
vivid emotion all over Europe. Even after his life- nomik, Zurich: Schweizer Verlagshaus, 1988 @ Giséle
time, Lavater remained a source of fascination for Marie, Les Fragments de Johann Caspar Lavater et
his contemporaries, enemies and friends, oppo- leur place dans V’histoire de la physiognomonie, Diss.
University of Bordeaux III, 1986 (unpublished) ¢ Mary
nents and admirers alike; and he remains one of the
L. Sloman, Genie des Herzens: Die Lebensgeschichte
most attractive figures of Illuminism. Johann Caspar Lavaters, Zurich & Leipzig: Mor-
gartenverlag, 1939 # Auguste Viatte, Les sources
Physiognomische Fragmente, zur Beforderung der
occultes du Romantisme: Illuminisme — Théosophie,
Menschenkenntniss und Menschenliebe (illustrated), 1770-1820, Paris: H. Champion, 1928, vol. 1, Chapter
Leipzig/Winterthur: Weidmann/H. Steiner, 1775-
“Le premier vulgarisateur: Lavater”, 153-180 (see also
1778; Among several new ed., see the German one by index of names for many other references to L. in both
Christoph Siegrist, Stuttgart: Reclam (Universal-Bib-
vols.) # Rolf Christian Zimmermann, Das Weltbild des
liothek, 150-155), 1984, and the reprint (Frankfurt/
jungen Goethe, 2 vols., Munich: W. Fink, 1979 (vol. 2),
Main, 1991), of the original ed.; First complete trans- 213-214.
lation into English: London, 1790-1798 @ William
Tegg published several epitomes of Lavater’s works
GISELE MARIE
under the title: Physiognomy; or, the Corresponding
Analogy Between the Conformation of the Features
and the Ruling Passions ..., 1865 and 1867 (287 Law, William, * 1686 King’s Cliffe,
pages and 7 plates); For details on the English editions Tt 9.4.1761 King’s Cliffe
see John Graham, “Lavater’s Physiognomy in Eng-
land”, Journal of the History of Ideas 22 (1961),
Law was educated at Emmanuel College, Cam-
561-572; For a complete listing, his “Lavater’s Phy-
siognomy: a checklist”, in: Bibliographic Society of bridge, of which he became a fellow in 1711. His
America 55 (1961), 297 @ Aussichten in die Ewigkeit, personal history is somewhat parallel to that of >
in Briefen an Herrn Joh. Georg Zimmermann, konigl. John Pordage. Like Pordage, Law refused to take
Grobrittannischen Leibarzt in Hannover, Zurich: the oath of allegiance to, in Law’s case, King
Orell, Gener, und Comp., 1768-1778; Part 1, 1768 George I in 17144, making him a Nonjuror, forcing
(contains the plan for all 25 letters, and also Letters him to resign his college position, and disallowing
nos. I-X); Part 2, 1769 (contains Letters XI & XII);
him other public positions as well. Law then lived
Part 3, 1773 (contains Letters XIII-X XV); Part 4, 1778
(contains Supplements, Notes and Corrections to the in Putney, near London, at the home of Edward
first three volumes) # Nathanaél. Oder, die eben so Gibbon from 1727 to 1737, where he tutored the
gewisse, als unerweisliche Gottlichkeit des Christen- historian Gibbon’s father. In about 1740, Law
thums. Fiir Nathanaéle, Das ist, Fiir Menschen, mit moved back to King’s Cliffe, where until his death
geradem, gesundem, ruhigem, Truglosem Wabhrheits- in 1761 he lived a celibate and quiet life shared
sinn, Zurich/Winterthur /Basel: H. Steiner und Comp.,
with Hester Gibbon, the historian’s aunt, and Mrs.
1786.
Hutcheson, a rich, pious widow. His later years
Lit.: Ernst Benz, “Swedenborg und Lavater”, Zeit- were spent studying > Boehme and writing in rela-
schrift fiir Kirchengeschichte 57 (1938), 153-216 @ tive seclusion.

--- Page 102 ---
LAW 678
Law’s community, at King’s Cliffe, was renowned Law likewise uses the dialogue form, developing
for its generous charity. Law and an anonymous his theses through conversations between Theo-
patron established a poorhouse for young girls, philus, a master theosopher, Theogones, and Euse-
teaching them to read, knit, sew, study the Bible, bius. It is in these dialogues that we find references
and attend church; they gave clothes, money, and to ‘Behmen’ as the ‘chosen instrument of God’.
food to the poor through almshouses they estab- In fact, The Spirit of Love largely consists in
lished. Mrs Hutcheson had a substantial income, explication of theosophical premises. Law, through
but she and Law gave away all but a tenth of their the mouth of Theophilus, explains the seven spirits
income to the poor. They all led an abstemious life, of God, the nature of wrath, evil, the fall of man
with prayers morning, noon, and night, Law him- and Lucifer, redemption, and numerous other top-
self arising at five a.m., and spending much of his ics. Although sometimes awkward in phrasing, and
day reading in his large library of mystical authors, never possessing the scope of Pordage’s works,
writing, and praying. Law’s dialogues demonstrate how deeply he had
Law’s A Serious Call to a Devout and Holy Life gone into theosophy.
(1728) was referred to by Caroline Spurge as the His later works also demonstrate Law’s corre-
most influential religious text of the 18th century, spondences with the Philadelphians. While Law
and does not reveal any trace of theosophy [> does not quite directly teach the doctrine of apo-
Christian Theosophy]. Law discovered Boehme catastasis like + Jane Lead, Law does insist that in
between 1733 and 1736, and studied Dionysius God Himself, there is neither wrath nor any anger
Andreas Freher’s works from 1737 onward, but at all. God is pure, boundless love. Wrath only
did not publicly acknowledge their influence on came into being when Lucifer fell and created
him. Consequently, as C.A. Muses points out, most nature fell into materiality; and so ‘God can no
scholars have ignored the influence of Freher on more begin to have any wrath, rage, or anger in
Law; this includes Stephen Hobhouse, in whose Himself after nature and creature are in a fallen
anthology of Law’s selected writings Freher’s name state than He could have been infinite wrath and
does not even appear in the index. But Law himself boundless rage everywhere and from all eternity’
did not ever cite Freher, and probably would not (Spirit, 392). Wrath is simply a result of fallen crea-
have cited Boehme himself openly (even though tures being separated from the Divine will to love.
some of his works are chiefly paraphrasings of Thus — and this point is critical - all creation, good
Boehme’s works) if he had not been publicly or evil, exists ‘to turn temporal evil into eternal
accused of plagiarism by a Dr. Trapp. Only after good’, for through creation ‘the supernatural Deity
this charge did Law openly refer to Boehme. wills and seeks the restoration of falien nature and
Scholars have commonly repeated that Law is creature to their first perfection’ (Spirit, 429). Else-
England’s greatest interpreter of Boehme, but in where, Law’s prose seems very close to Pordage’s
fact Law is simply England’s most well-known writing on eternal nature, and suggests that Law
Boehmean author. Without doubt, Britain’s great- and Pordage were much more akin than Law
est Boehmean is Pordage, whose work is both more would publicly acknowledge.
complex and more extensive. But Law is a fine styl- It is true that Law was a Boehmean theosopher,
ist, whose devotional writings are at once eloquent but his theosophy was so shorn of references to its
and simple. Of course, Boehine himself had an elo- antecedents that it was not nearly so threatening to
quent and simply devotional side, manifested in more conventional Christians as the extraordinary
such works as Christosophia: The Way to Christ. revelations of Pordage or Lead. Thus it is not sur-
Yet as anyone knows who has tried to make his prising to find that Charles Williams could write of
way through some of Boehme’s more cosmological Law’s works that they form ‘perhaps one of the
writing, his work can be extraordinarily dense and best statements of the pure Christian religion that
difficult. These deeper aspects of theosophy are by have ever been issued’, and Rufus Jones could term
and large missing from Law’s work. Law a “saint” and a “prophet”. One is hard
Still, Law was influenced by theosophy. Boehme pressed to find praise like this for the visionaries
was given on occasion to the dialogue form, whose Pordage or Lead.
antecedents are found in works like those of > Law’s later works perched between a broader
Giordano Bruno, earlier in > John Scotus Eriu- audience and the theosophy that he was interpret-
gena, earlier still in the Corpus Hermeticum, and ing to that audience. They form an introduction to
earlier still in the works of Plato. In his most the theosophical tradition, and if they do not reflect
Boehmean later works, like The Spirit of Love, the visionary insights of a Pordage, or the extraor-

--- Page 103 ---
679 LAZZARELLI
dinary breadth of Boehme’s books, still his apho- Lazzarelli, Lodovico, * 4.2.1447 San
ristic gift, and his ability to make theosophical Severino, + 23.6.1500 San Severino
insights accessible to many earn him a place in the
history of theosophy. Italian humanist, poet, Christian hermetist, and
pioneer of Christian kabbalah |-> Jewish Influences
William Law, A Serious Call to a Devout and Holy Life III]. Lazzarelli was born the youngest son of a
and The Spirit of Love, London: Griffith, 1729; New physician, Alessandro Lazzarelli, in San Severino.
York: Paulist P, 1978 # The Case of Reason, or Natural His father died soon after his birth, and his mother
Religion, Fairly and Fully Stated, London: W. Innys,
moved with her children to Campli, where
1731 # A Collection of Letters, London: J. Richard-
Lodovico began his studies under a certain Chris- son, 1760 @ An Earnest and Serious Answer to Dr.
Trapp’s Discourse of the Folly of Sin and Danger of toforo da Montone. Introduced by the latter to a
being Righteous Over-much, London: W. Innys, 1740 typical humanist curriculum, he turned out to be a
¢@ The Grounds and Reasons of Christian Regenera- talented and ambitious child, with an early calling
tion, London: W. Innys, 1739 @ A Practical Treatise for poetry. A poem about the battle of San Fla-
upon Christian Perfection, London: W. Innys, 1726
viano, as early as 1460, is said to have been
The Spirit of Love: Being an Appendix to the Spirit of
received with admiration by members of the vic-
Prayer, London: W. Innys and J. Richardson, 1752 @
The Spirit of Prayer, London: W. Innys, 1749 # Three torious party, King Ferdinand I of Aragon (known
Letters to the Bishop of Bangor, London: W. Innys, as Ferrante) and Alessandro Sforza: somehow the
1717-1719 # The Way to Divine Knowledge: Being Lazzarelli family must have had access to these
several dialogues ... preparatory to a new edition of high political circles. From an early age, Lazzarelli
the works of J].Bohme, and the right use of them, Lon- found employment as a private tutor in the house-
don: W. Innys, 1752 # The Works of the reverend
holds of various wealthy families. From Atri,
William Law, M.A., ed. G. Moreton, Brockenhurst/
where he taught the eldest son of Matteo di Capua,
Cambridge, 1892-1893, 9 vols.
he moved on to the household of the bishop of
Teramo, Giovanni Antonio (Giannantonio) Cam- Lit.: Brian Gibbons, Gender in Mystical and Occult
Thought: Behmenism and its Development in England, pano. This well-known orator, poet and philoso-
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1996, 10-11, 173-179 @ pher seems to have been an important formative
Stephen Hobhouse, Selected Mystical Writings of influence on Lazzarelli’s poetic development. From
William Law, New York: Harper, 1938 @ Serge Hutin, Teramo Lazzarelli moved on to Venice, which
Les Disciples anglais de Jacob Boehme aux XVII* et would remain his main place of residence for sev-
XVIII® siécles, Paris: Editions Denoél, 1960, 151-162
eral years. Here he perfected his Latin and Greek
Rufus Jones, The Luminous Trail, New York: Mac-
under the humanist Giorgio Merula, and got millan, 1947, 124-134 @ C.A. Muses, I/lumination on
Jacob Boéhme: The Work Of Dionysius Andreas Fre- acquainted with the poet Elisio Calenzio.
her, New York: King’s Crown, 1951 @ E.P. Rudolph, The year 1468 marks Lazzarelli’s maturation as
William Law, Boston: Twayne, 1980 @ Caroline Spurge, a poet, as shown by his “Hymn to Prometheus”
“William Law and the Mystics”, in: Cambridge His- and an heroic poem about a tournament in Padua,
tory of English Literature, Cambridge: Cambridge UP, that earned him considerable fame. In the same
1912, vol. 9, 305-328, 308 @ Henri Talon, William
year occurred one of the highlights of his life, when
Law: A Study in Literary Craftsmanship, London,
1948 @ Nils Thune, The Behmenists and the Philadel- he was given an audience by the Emperor Frederick
phians: A Contribution to the Study of English Mys- III, who was in Italy to visit Pope Paul II. He recited
ticism in the 17th and 18th Centuries, Uppsala: an oration in praise of poetry, and the Emperor
Almquist and Wiksells, 1948, 13 # Arthur Versluis, decided to crown him with laurels. To the end of his
“Christian Theosophic Literature of the Seventeenth life, Lazzarelli and his family would remain proud
and Eighteenth Centuries”, in: W.J. Hanegraaff and
of his status as “Poet Laureate”. In the following
R. van den Broek (eds.), Gnosis and Hermeticism from
years Lazzarelli kept devoting himself to orations Antiquity to Modern Times, Albany: SUNY Press,
1998, 217-234 @ idem, Wisdom’s Children: A Chris- and poetry, including a work called De gentilium
tian Esoteric Tradition, Albany: SUNY Press, 1999, deorum imaginibus (On the images of the heathen
79-87 @ Keith Walker, William Law: His Life and gods) inspired by the Tarocchi of Mantegna, but
Thought, London, 1973 # Christopher Walton, Notes also to the study of theology and astronomy. At one
and Materials for an adequate Biography of... point — the precise year is unclear — he appears to
William Law, London, 1854 # Charles Williams, The
have moved from Venice to Camerino, where he
Descent of the Dove, New York: Meridian, 1956, 195-
joined the household of the city’s ruler, Giulio
196.
Cesare da Varano, as tutor of his nephew Fabrizio.
ARTHUR VERSLUIS In Pioraca, where the Varano family resided for

--- Page 104 ---
LAZZARELLI 680
some time to escape the plague, Lazzarelli began translation of the remaining three tracts of the Cor-
what would become his most important poetic pus Hermeticum (nowadays known as C.H. XVI-
work: the Fasti christiani religionis (The holy days XVIII), which Lazzarelli had discovered in a
of the Christian religion). Conceived as a Christian manuscript different from the one used by Ficino,
counterpart to Ovid’s Fasti, it is a large chronicle of and which had not been translated into Latin
the feasts of the liturgical year, prefaced by an before. All three translations were preceded by
account of the life and passion of Christ and the dedicatory prefaces (the second in the form of a
early history of the Church. poem). These texts show how deep an impression
Probably in 1473 Lazzarelli briefly entered the the hermetic writings had made on Lazzarelli, who
service of Lorenzo Zane, future Patriarch of Anti- addresses Correggio as Hermes Trismegistus’s spir-
och, and accompanied him to Rome. Here he itual son, and concludes that since Correggio is his
joined Pomponio Leto’s reformed Roman Aca- spiritual father, he himself is therefore Hermes’s
demy: a club of humanists enchanted with the cul- “grandson”. Lazzarelli’s translation of C.H. XVI-
tural splendor of ancient Rome, who had been XVIII, referred to by him as the “Diffinitiones
persecuted under Pope Paul II but now enjoyed the Asclepii”, remained in Correggio’s possession until
protection of the ruling Pope, Sixtus IV. In this 1501, when the prophet was received by king Louis
congenial atmosphere Lazzarelli continued work- XII of France and gave Lazzarelli’s hermetic manu-
ing on his Fasti. He claimed to have completed it in script away as a gift to an embassador. At the same
1480, but in fact the manuscript evidence shows occasion Correggio met > Symphorien Champier,
that he was still working on it between 1482 and who published the “Diffinitiones Asclepii” in 1507.
1484, and many further corrections were added up A manuscript “Epistola Enoch”, anonymous but
to a period as late as 1495. This is important certainly written by Lazzarelli, contains a detailed
because the Fasti contain a few explicit references account of Correggio’s sensational public appear-
to the > Hermetic literature; they are most plausi- ance in Rome on Palm Sunday 1484, when he
bly explained as late additions, reflecting his dis- entered the city dressed like Christ and seated on a
covery of the Hermetic writings in 1481 or 1482. white ass. The prophet’s message and presentation
It is in 1481 that Lazzarelli met the strange apoc- was now permeated by hermetic references: he
alyptic prophet ~ Giovanni da Correggio (ca. called himself “Mercurio” and God’s or Jesus’s
1451?-after 1503): an event that proved decisive chosen servant Pimander. Although the “Epistola
for the rest of his life. While the cardinals were Enoch” makes no mention of it, it is probably at
gathering for a consistory meeting, Correggio this occasion that Correggio was arrested and
appeared on the stairs of the papal palace, pro- thrown into prison, and Lazzarelli must have been
claiming the apocalypse and calling for repentance. among the friends with whom he is said to have
Lazzarelli was among the bystanders, and was escaped.
deeply impressed: he writes how, in response to Almost nothing is known about Lazzarelli’s
Correggio’s call, he ‘left the Parnassian hills movements in the following years. In 1486 he fell
and everything else, and right away followed him ill and returned to his family in San Severino. It is
to Mount Zion — the first of his pupils’. It has probably from there that he moved on to Naples,
often been assumed that Lazzarelli’s conver- where he was employed for some time by Francesco
sion from profane poetry to divine wisdom - else- Colocci as tutor of his younger cousin Angelo. He
where referred to as a turn ‘from the Helicon to managed to get an audience with king Ferrante and
Mount Zion’ - meant a conversion to hermetism. present him with a copy of his Fasti; but the king
However, there is no evidence that Correggio’s seems to have shown little interest. Around this
Christian-apocalyptic message already contained same time Lazzarelli must have given the final
hermetic elements in 1481; it is more likely that his redaction to one of his best known poems, the
pupil Lazzarelli, with his superior humanistic cul- “Opusculum de Bombyce”. The central part gives
ture, first introduced the prophet to the Corpus a matter-of-fact description of the cultivation of
Hermeticum and the Asclepius. silkworms; but in the opening and closing sections,
In 1482 Lazzarelli produced a beautiful manu- the transformation of the silkworm is discussed as
script containing the complete “philosophical” an image of how the soul may imitate Christ in
hermetica in Latin, and offered it as a gift to achieving immortality by a process of palingenetic
his beloved teacher. Its first part contained > Mar- regeneration. In an embryonic form the poem fore-
silio Ficino’s Pimander (1471), that is to say, Cor- shadows several teachings that would come to full
pus Hermeticum |-XIV. The second part contained development in Lazzarelli’s most important her-
the Asclepius. The third part contained a Latin metic work, the Crater Hermetis.

--- Page 105 ---
681 LAZZARELLI
It is probably during his years in Naples that Laz- ever, is able to attain perfect knowledge of God,
zarelli began to gain some reputation as an exorcist and thereby participates even in God’s “fertility”,
who could heal the sick by casting out demons. He that is to say, in his very powers of creation. As a
was convinced that, thanks to Correggio, he had result, he can create souls. Lazzarelli explains this
been regenerated and reborn as a “true man”; and hermetic mystery of soul-creating not only with
the power of exorcism was implied by this new reference to the Asclepius but also by means of an
spiritual status. Lazzarelli’s concept of spiritual allegorical interpretation of a Jewish prescription
regeneration is described in his most important for creating a golem or articifial man. The passage
hermetic work, called “A Dialogue on the Supreme is taken from Eleazar of Worms’ commentary on
Dignity of Man, entitled the Way of Christ and the the Sefer Yetzirah, which Lazzarelli probably found
Mixing-Bowl of Hermes”. Mostly referred to as in one of the writings of Giovanni Pico della
the Crater Hermetis, and written probably be- Mirandola’s Jewish teacher Yohanan Alemanno.
tween 1492 and 1494, it is one of the purest exam- There is abundant reason to assume (although
ples of hermetic-christian syncretism known to us. there is no direct and conclusive evidence) that the
The Crater is closely modeled on the authentic her- whole of Lazzarelli’s central doctrine of “making
metic dialogues, but Lazzarelli casts himself in the souls” is derived from similar doctrines found in
role of the hermetic teacher, and his pupils are king the kabbalistic school of Abraham Abulafia, trans-
Ferrante himself and his Secretary of State, the mitted to Lazzarelli by mediation of Alemanno. It
well-known poet Giovanni Pontano. There is no is from this perspective that he must have seen the
evidence that either of the two ever read the Crater, god-making passages of the Asclepius in a new
or became aware of the role they played in it. light. Lazzarelli’s integration of Jewish kabbalistic
At the very beginning of the Crater we find a elements in a Christian-hermetic treatise makes
unique and extremely bold assertion: the great him into one of the earliest pioneers of Christian
being Poimandres, who appears to Hermes in a kabbalah after Pico della Mirandola.
vision described in C.H. I, was no one else but Contrary to what has been argued by earlier gen-
Christ himself, who would later incarnate in Jesus. erations of scholars, Lazzarelli’s doctrine contains
Poimandres-Christ has now taken residence in Laz- no trace of > magic, astral or otherwise. He is con-
zarelli and has illumined his mind. Under that cerned with a process of spiritual transformation
authority he is about to explain to his pupils the by means of which man can attain true self-knowl-
nature of true felicity, which can only be obtained edge and be reunited with God. The doctrine is
by self-knowledge. Partly in response to questions remarkably original in several respects, particu-
by Ferrante and Pontano, Lazzarelli embarks on an larly in the way it handles the notoriously prob-
allegorical exegesis of various biblical passages (he lematic question of hermetic idolatry. In line with
discusses the true meaning of the paradise trees, the the prisca theologia tradition, Lazzarelli presents
women in Proverbs, the “daughters of men”, and Hermes Trismegistus as divinely inspired; but
the Fall). During the course of the discussion, unlike other Christian hermetists, he confronts
which is full of implicit and explicit references to Hermes’ idolatry head-on by suggesting that his
the hermetic writings, the pupils are gradually ability to understand the revelation was limited by
moved to a state of ecstasy, until they are ready for the fact that he was and remained a pagan living
the final revelation of the great mystery. Very before the Incarnation. Only Christians can really
remarkably, this mystery is explained with refer- understand the hermetic message and achieve true
ence to the most controversial passages of the spiritual regeneration. Although Giovanni “Mer-
entire hermetic literature: the so-called “god-mak- curio” da Correggio is never mentioned in the
ing” passages in the Asclepius, about the animation Crater, he is clearly present behind the scenes as the
of statues (23-24, 37-38). Precisely in this most culmination of a progressive hermetic-Christian
unlikely of all places — their idolatrous nature had development: having first inspired Hermes as
been a matter of concern for Christians since > Poimandres, the second person of the trinity then
Augustine — the deepest secret is to be found. Laz- incarnated as Christ, and now he has returned as
zarelli implicitly admits that Hermes Trismegistus Correggio, who had entered Rome as the “Her-
did lapse into idolatry because, as a pagan living metic Christ”.
before the Incarnation, he could not but miscon- The spiritual philosophy of the Crater is cer-
strue the message that Poimandres/Christ revealed tainly the center of Lazzarelli’s Christian her-
to him. The Egyptians attracted souls into their metism, but by 1495 his interests seem to have
statues because they did not know how to create expanded to include alchemy. In this year he met
them themselves. The Christian hermetist, how- an otherwise unknown Burgundian alchemist,

--- Page 106 ---
LAZZARELLI 682
Johannes Rigaud de Branchiis, who was believed to structure and presentation, and intriguing by the
have produced the elixir of life and who became his originality and occasional brilliance of its ideas.
teacher. Several texts by Lazzarelli reflect this new
“Epistola Enoch”, “Three Prefaces addressed to Gio-
course of study, most importantly a transcription
vanni da Correggio”, “Crater Hermetis”, “Vade
of Petrus Bonus’ Pretiosa Margarita Novella with
Mecum”, “Epigram”: Latin originals and annotated
an attached epigram, and a transcription of pseudo- English trans., in: Wouter J. Hanegraaff & Ruud M.
llullian materials preceded by an introduction, Bouthoorn, Lodovico Lazzarelli (1447-1500): The
referred to as the “Vade Mecum”. Lazzarelli found Hermetic Writings and Related Documents, Phoenix:
in pseudo-Llull the concept of a general transfor- Arizona Medieval & Renaissance Texts & Studies,
mation and restoration of man and the cosmos, 2005 “Diffinitiones Asclepii” (ed. C. Vasoli), in:
E. Garin et al., Umanesimo e esoterismo, Padua:
and some references to special divine revelations
CEDAM, 1960, 251-259 (and see extensive list of
and initiatory bonds between master and disciple;
errata in P.O. Kristeller, “Lodovico Lazzarelli e Gio-
it was therefore natural for him to see these alchem- vanni Mercurio da Correggio” [see below, Lit.], 20-25)
ical texts as on a continuum with the philosophy of @ “Opusculum de Bombyce” (ed. Georg Roellen-
the Crater. Like the later Correggio, who likewise bleck), in: Hans Rheinfelder, Pierre Christophorov &
developed an interest in alchemy, Lazzarelli seems Eberhard Miuller-Bochat (eds.), Literatur und Spiritu-
alitat: Hans Sckhommodau zum siebzigsten Geburtstag,to have believed that a universal alchemical remedy
Minchen: Wilhelm Fink, 1978, 225-231 @ Fasti Chris-
might convert the enemies of the Catholic faith to
tianae Religionis (ed. Marco Bertolini), Naples: D’Au-
Christianity and thus promote the return of the ria, 1995 # “De gentilium deorum imaginibus”, in:
golden age. William O’Neal, A Critial Edition of De Gentilium
Early in 1494 Lazzarelli left Naples, which was Deorum Imaginibus by Ludovico Lazzarelli: First
in a state of political instability and unrest follow- Edited Text with Introduction and Translation, Lewis-
ing the death of king Ferrante in january. He may ton, Queenston, Lampeter: Edwin Mellen Press, 1997
¢ Filippo Lazzarelli, “The Life of Lodovico Lazza-have gone to Rome, and from there to Correggio’s
relli”, Latin original and annotated trans., in: Hane-
home town Bologna, and possibly wandered fur-
graaft & Bouthoorn, o.c.
ther up north. But he eventually returned to San
Severino. Filippo Lazzarelli, in his biography of his Lit.: Franco Bacchelli, Giovanni Pico e Pier Leone da
brother, emphasizes his exemplary piety and saint- Spoleto: Tra filosofia dell’amore e tradizione cabalis-
liness during the last years of his life: Lodovico was tica, Bologna: Leo S. Olschki, 2001, 70-85 # Chiara
Crisciani, “Hermeticism and Alchemy: The Case of‘wholly dissolved into spirit’ and ‘always thought
Ludovico Lazzarelli”, Early Science and Medicine 5:2
and spoke of God’. He seems to have continued
(2000), 145-159 # Wouter J. Hanegraaff, “Lodovico
curing the sick by casting out demons, and cor- Lazzarelli and the Hermetic Christ: At the Sources of
rectly foresaw the death of his older brother Gero- Renaissance Hermetism”, in: Hanegraaff & Bout-
lamo and himself in a dream. Lazzarelli died of hoorn, Lodovico Lazzarelli (quoted supra) ¢ Moshe
pleurisy at the age of fifty-three. His body lies Idel, “Hermeticism and Judaism”, in: Ingrid Merkel &
buried in the church of San Lorenzo in his place Allen G. Debus (eds.), Hermeticism and the Renais-
sance: Intellectual History and the Occult in Earlyof birth.
Modern Europe, Washington, London Torento: Folger
Lazzarelli is important as the first Latin transla-
Shakespear Library/Associated University Presses, 1988,
tor of the three final tractates of the Corpus Her- 59-76 @ Paul Oskar Kristeller, “Marsilio Ficino e
meticum, as one of the earliest and purest examples Lodovico Lazzarelli: Contributo alla diffuzione delle
of Christian hermetism, and as a pioneer of Chris- idee ermetiche nel Rinascimento” (1938), repr. in:
tian kabbalah. His influence during his lifetime idem, Studies in Renaissance Thought and Letters 1,
remained limited: only the “Epistola Enoch” and Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 1956, 221-247
¢ idem, “Lodovico Lazzarelli e Giovanni da Correggio,
the “Opusculum de Bombyce” made it into print.
due ermetici del Quattrocento, e il manoscritto II. D. I.
In 1505 > Lefevre d’Etaples included an abridged 4 della Biblioteca Comunale degli Ardenti di Viterbo”
an sanitized version of the Crater in his important (1960), repr. in: idem, Studies in Renaissance Thought
edition of the authentic philosophical hermetica, and Letters 3, Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura
and Gabriel du Preau published a French transla- 1993, 207-225 @ Claudio Moreschini, Dall’Asclepius
tion in 1549. We know that the Crater had an al Crater Hermetis: Studi sull’ermetismo latino tardo-
impact on > Cornelius Agrippa, but neither this antico e rinascimentale, Giardini: Pisa, 1985 # Maria
Paola Saci, Ludovico Lazzarelli: Da Elicona a Sion,
nor later lines of influence have been studied in any
Rome: Bulzoni, 1999 @ S. Sosti, “Il Crater Hermetis di
detail. It remains that the Crater Hermetis is one Ludovico Lazzarelli”, Quaderni, vol. 1, Naples:
of the pearls of Renaissance hermetic literature, Presso, l’Istituto 1984, 101-132 @ D.P. Walker, Spiri-
commanding respect for the beauty of its formal tual and Demonic Magic from Ficino to Campanella

--- Page 107 ---
683 LEAD(E)
(1958), repr. University Park, Pennsylvania: Pennsylva- another sense her good fortune, for like > Gichtel
nia State University Press, 2000, 64-72. and many other theosophers, she took this as a sign
that she should throw herself wholly on the mercy
WOUTER J. HANEGRAAFF of God.
Lead had met > John Pordage as early as 1663,
Lead(e), Jane, * 1623 Norfolk, a meeting about which she wrote in her preface to
t 19.8.1704 London his Theologia Mystica, and at which she was pro-
foundly impressed by what she saw as his spiritual
Lead was born as Jane Ward in - according to her ‘anointing’. She soon became a member of his cir-
own account — a reasonably wealthy upper-class cle, but it was not until after her husband’s death
family. She and her family lived a good life, and she that she was able to devote herself wholly to theos-
received a fine education. When she was fifteen, on ophy. She and Pordage eventually lived in the same
a Christmas eve, she was dancing and celebrating house, along with several others, the better to
with her family and friends, but heard a voice that devote themselves to prayer and mutual religious
told her ‘Cease from this, I have another Dance to understanding. During this time, while Lead slowly
lead thee in, for this is Vanity’. For three years she assumed leadership of the group, Pordage wrote
lived in melancholy isolation, occasionally reading his most important works.
books and almost always staying apart from peo- After Pordage’s death in 1681, the responsibility
ple; despite the counsel of her father, Schildknapp for continuing their theosophical work fell to Lead.
Ward, and a chaplain, she felt the sins of the world By 1683, she had had one of his more important
upon her, and believed that because she had once treatises published, as well as some of her own,
told a lie, she would not be allowed into the New including The Heavenly Cloud Now Breaking
Jerusalem. But at the age of eighteen, she ‘was so (1681) and The Revelation of Revelations (1683).
richly favoured by her dear and blessed Mediator, Upon reading the latter book, a wealthy widow
as to receive at that time the Seal of her Absolution offered her and her group the use of her home for
and Assurance, in a manner very special, there their meetings, an arrangement that lasted until her
being presented to her in a Vision, the form of a death, at which the group was forced to find
Pardon with a Seal to it’ (Thune, 68-69). another place to meet nearer to London. By 1692,
Soon after this time, she went to London, chiefly however, the theosophical circle had diminished,
in order to find a religious context for and deepen- and it languished only until 1694.
ing of her visionary experience. But although she As Lead’s name and works began to circulate
attended numerous meetings, she was disappointed in Germany and the Netherlands, they became
until she met a Dr Crisp, a well known clergyman known to Francis Lee, who was to play an impor-
who had been ousted from his pastorate in tant role in making her name more widely known.
Brinkworth in 1642, and had come to London just Born in 1660, this brilliant young man had been
at the time Lead was there. He was able to resolve fellow of St Johns College, Oxford, but had to leave
all her doubts and give her a much clearer under- because he refused to swear allegiance to the new
standing of what had happened to her; but unfor- king. Having left the college, he first worked as a
tunately he died in February, 1643. tutor to several noblemen, but eventually travelled
When she became interested in marrying one of to Italy, where in Padua he took his medical degree,
her religiously inclined friends in London, who and practiced medicine in Venice for two years.
apparently was not of her social class, her parents Returning to England via the Netherlands, he was
brought her back to Norfolk in an attempt to given a copy of The Heavenly Cloud Now Break-
marry her off properly, which she refused, since she ing and was deeply impressed. Lee returned to Eng-
did not want to marry merely for earthly reasons. land and, with two unnamed ‘students of divinity’,
At twenty, she married William Lead, a merchant, met with Lead herself, acting as interpreter for the
with whom she lived happily for twenty-seven others. Lee realized the extraordinary significance
more years. With him she had four daughters, two of this elderly woman and her ‘loose papers...
of whom died, and two of whom reached maturity occasionally penned for her own private memory’.
and themselves were married. Apparently she and Due to his help as a scholar and amanuensis to
her husband shared spiritual concerns. Lead, her group, known as the Philadelphians,
But in February, 1670, her husband died, and the became more public and hence more controversial,
man to whom his money was entrusted absconded abandoning the seclusion that Pordage’s circle had
with it, leaving Lead destitute. What could have enjoyed. At the turn of the 17th century, the
been a catastrophe, however, she regarded as in Philadelphians even attempted a rapprochement

--- Page 108 ---
LEAD(E) 684
with the Continental theosophers, but this effort she wrote that ‘albeit I had heard of such a Notion,
came to nothing. I did altogether disregard it; and would not enter-
Lead’s health had been weak since 1700, when tain any belief concerning such a latitude as this,
she already had premonitions of her impending that should extend so far, as to recover the whole
death. Indeed, in 1702, she wrote “A Living lapsed Creation, till I had an apparent Vision
Funeral Testimony”; and although by the spring of opened unto me’. While admitting that Boehme’s
1704 she felt somewhat better, she was stricken work did not directly refer to apocatastasis or uni-
again by fever and severe pain, and this continued versal restoration, she eventually came to hold that
until her death in the same year. Her painful and her own revelation represented a gift of grace spe-
protracted death was taken as a sign by Gichtel and cial to her own era and that such an exceptional
others that some of her doctrines were false, and revelation was not yet to be revealed through
she was suffering because of them — but however Boehme himself. It was to be kept for a later gener-
one interprets such difficulties, it seems that she ation — her own. In fact, Lead’s doctrine of apoc-
endured her trial with a patient, graceful, and illu- atastasis seems to derive from a very powerful
minated countenance. illumination, and an overwhelming sense of divine
Lead’s funeral oration was given by Richard compassion. It seems that her experience of light at
Roach, who later — after receiving a vision of her that occasion was so strong that there was no
appearing from Heaven like a globe of light - longer any place in it for evil or demons. In The
assumed leadership of the Philadelphian society Enochian Walks with God (1694) she writes of
itself. But under Roach’s leadership, the society how wonderful is the ‘Everlasting-Age that shall
took on a distinctly more private aspect. The soci- swallow up all those ages wherein sin and death
ety returned to essentially what it had been under have reigned, with all those miserable effects that
Pordage: a small circle meeting at Baldwin Gar- have been ever since the creation of this world’. She
dens, where the Philadelphians had met in 1697 also writes prophetically in words attributed to
before going public. God Himself: ‘I will make all things new, the End
The late 1690s were the period of greatest activ- shall return to its original-primary-being, let none
ity for the Philadelphian society, since not only did grudge that the grace of God of this latitude is, as
the society publish its monthly periodical Theo- to make a complete restoration; for as there was
sophical Transactions, but Lead and Lee published neither sin, nor centre to it, so it must be again,
many of Lead’s most important works as well. when the hour of God’s judgment shall come’. The
Lead’s writings are visionary and prophetic, with a doctrine of apocatastasis assumes a precise equiva-
millennialist inclination. Nearly all of her work lence between the prior harmony and unity in God
consists in accounts of visionary experiences; in before creation, and the restoration after time of
this respect, she was much more explicit than > the fundamental harmony that the Fall of man rent
Boehme or even Pordage. While Boehme exhorts asunder.
his readers in Christosophia to “woo” Sophia, In brief, then, Lead is an important theosophic
Lead outlines her visionary encounters with Sophia figure. Her work does not have the scope or ency-
in such works as The Laws of Paradise. She clopedic nature of Pordage’s, but she left behind a
strongly believed that she was the prophetic vehicle substantial legacy not only by having been instru-
chosen to reveal a new spiritual era for humanity, mental in the development of the Philadelphian
and saw herself as a prophet through whom God Society, but also by having published many vision-
spoke, chiefly through visions. ary theosophic treatises and having introduced the
Gichtel was skeptical of Lead’s visionary empha- doctrine of universal restoration. While not influ-
sis, and eventually rejected her adherence to uni- ential on subsequent mainstream religious or liter-
versal restoration, or apocatastasis, for which she ary figures, Lead’s work was rediscovered by a
is perhaps best known. Among the Church Fathers, handful of evangelical Christians in the Southern
Origen upheld this doctrine very early in the Chris- United States during the late 2oth century and
tian era, and such noted Christian writers as > republished in pamphlet form during this period as
Johannes Scottus Eriugena in the 9th century A.D. prophetic works. Major discussions of her work
also concluded that universal restoration — the doc- are found in Gibbons (1996), Hutin (1960), Thune
trine that ultimately all creatures created by God (1948), and Versluis (1999).
are destined for spiritual restoration and salvation —
was only reasonable. Initially, Lead did not counte- Ark ofFaith, London, 1696 @ Ascent to the Mount of
nance the doctrine of universal restoration: in her Vision, London, 1699 @ Enochian Walks with God,
A Revelation of the Everlasting Gospel Message London: Edwards, 1694 @ A Fountain of Gardens: or,

--- Page 109 ---
685 LEADBEATER
A Spiritual Diary of the Wonderful Experiences of a ous apprenticeship under the Masters had resulted
Christian Soul, under the Conduct of the Heavenly in a series of initiations which had opened his psy-
Wisdom; Continued for the Year MDCLXX VIII, Lon- chic faculties and proffered upon him supranormal
don, 1700 @ Heavenly Cloud Now Breaking, London,
insight. At this time Leadbeater also began to engi-
1681 @ Laws of Paradise, London, 1695 # A Message
to the Philadelphian Society, London, 1696/1698 ¢ neer for himself a rather fanciful history, and
Messenger of an Universal Peace, London, 1698 @ encouraged the belief that he had been born in
Revelation of Revelations, London, 1683 The Signs 1847 —the same year as > Annie Besant, the second
of the Times, London, 1699 @ Tree of Faith, London, President of the Theosophical Society and his life-
1696. long supporter.
Leadbeater’s clairvoyantly-generated revelations
Lit.: Brian Gibbons, Gender in Mystical and Occult
extended the synoptic template of Blavatskian Thought: Behmenism and its Development in England,
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1996, 16-18, 144-152, Theosophy by removing its reliance on textual
167-171 @ Bernard Gorceix, Flambée et Agonie: Mys- hermeneutics. As a consequence Leadbeater felt
tiques du XVII siecle allemand, Sisteron: Présence, capable of applying his “astral perception” to pre-
1977, 279-281 ¢@ idem, Johann Georg Gichtel: Théo- viously non-Theosophical domains, a task sanc-
sophe D’Amsterdam, Paris: VAge d’Homme, 1975, tioned by his close professional partnership with
43, 66, 69, 73 # Serge Hutin, Les Disciples anglais de
Besant. Together, Leadbeater and Besant traced
Jacob Boehme aux XVII° et XVIII® siécles, Paris: Edi-
the past lives of Society members, mapped the rise tions Denoél, 1960, 99-125 @ Nils Thune, The
Behmenists and the Philadelphians: A Contribution to and fall of continents, explored the geography of
the Study of English Mysticism in the 17th and 18th space, and investigated the atomic and sub-atomic
Centuries, Uppsala: Almquist and Wiksells, 1948, 68- worlds — all by means of applied clairvoyance. For
213 Arthur Versluis, “Christian Theosophic Litera- Leadbeater, clairvoyance did not supplant the
ture of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries”, in: deductions of empirical science, but perfected
W.J. Hanegraaff and R. van den Broek (eds.), Gnosis
them, for the psychic adept had planes of percep-
and Hermeticism from Antiquity to Modern Times,
tion available to him beyond the ken of the mun- Albany: SUNY Press, 1998, 217-234 @ idem, Theo-
sophia: Hidden Dimensions of Christianity, Hudson: dane scientist.
Lindisfarne, 1994, 209-217 @ idem, Wisdom’s Chil- Leadbeater’s rise to prominence within the Soci-
dren: A Christian Esoteric Tradition, Albany: SUNY ety during the late 1890s led to the departure of
Press, 1999, §7-77- several disaffected members who resented the
changes made to the Blavatskian ethos. This prob-
ARTHUR VERSLUIS lem was compounded in 1906 when Leadbeater
was accused by several Society members of having
Leadbeater, Charles Webster, encouraged their boys in habits of sexual “self-
* 16.2.1854 Stockport (England), abuse”. Leadbeater admitted the truth of the alle-
T 1.3.1934 Perth (Australia) gations, even suggesting he may have provided
“indicative action”, but argued the practice was
Prime ideologue of the + Theosophical Society permissible on occult grounds. Such allegations
following the death of > Helena Petrovna Bla- were to be brought against Leadbeater for much of
vatsky, and author of over 40 Theosophical books, the remainder of his career.
many of which have remained in print. Second Pre- From 1909 Leadbeater began to assert that a
siding Bishop of the Liberal Catholic Church and young Brahmin boy from the Adyar estate, Jiddu
33° Co-Mason. Introduced adventist expectation Krishnamurti, was to be the physical “Vehicle” for
into the Theosophical Society in the figure of Jiddu the World-Teacher, a highly-evolved entity other-
Krishnamurti (1895-1986), acknowledged by Lead- wise known as the Bodhisattva Maitreya or Christ.
beater as the ‘Vehicle for the Coming of the World- The World-Teacher, whose province in the Great
Teacher’. White Brotherhood (of Masters) was “Minister of
Born in Stockport, England, Leadbeater was Education and Religion”, was to return to Earth
ordained to the Anglican priesthood before in order to inculcate a new age of spiritualized
encountering Theosophy in 1883. He soon left his theurgy. The era of the Seventh Ray to be ushered
curacy and travelled to the Society’s headquarters in by the World-Teacher would see the replacement
on the Adyar river near Madras, India. Soon there- of outmoded piety with an energized occultism,
after, Leadbeater began to assert he was in contact capable of bringing about a self-actualized evolu-
with several of the same Theosophical Masters tionism. Indeed, one of the first signs of the new era
whose beneficence had originally been bestowed would be the emergence of a new racial type: the
upon Blavatsky. Leadbeater claimed that his ardu- denizens of the “sixth sub-race”.

--- Page 110 ---
LEADBEATER 686
To encourage this great evolutionary leap, Lead- into the Great White Brotherhood itself. Lead-
beater incorporated three projects into his rather beater died in Perth, Australia, on 1 March 1934.
idiosyncratic Theosophical millenarianism. The Leadbeater’s influence on 20th century occultism
first was Universal Co-Freemasonry which had has been immense. Aside from popularizing such
been inaugurated in France in the 1890s. The Eng- notions as the aura and the chakras, his abiding
lish section, under Besant’s governance, soon contribution has been to sanction the occultist
became an arm of the Theosophical Society with belief that the meta-empirical domain is governed
Leadbeater enshrined as its primary apologist and entirely by physical laws. Thus, according to Lead-
ritualist. Leadbeater averred that Co-Masonic ini- beater’s clairvoyant vision, the dynamics of divine
tiations, under the provenance of “the Master the power are only comprehensible in terms germane
Count [de ~ Saint Germain]”, were innately to physics and engineering: the Christian eucharis-
efficacious in conferring elevated evolutionary sta- tic service, for instance, is nothing other than ‘the
tus, and would prepare the ground for the Coming. construction and utilization of a magnificent ma-
Leadbeater’s second project, the Order of the Star chine for the liberation of force’ (Science, 16). So,
in the East, was instigated in r911 as a propagan- too, the Coming could be humanly engineered
distic tool for the dissemination of information through the rites of various theurgic enterprises,
relating to the imminent Coming, and boasted an each designed to assist in potentiating the elevation
international membership in the tens of thousands. of Krishnamurti to the status of World-Teacher.
The third project, the Liberal Catholic Church Leadbeater’s rationalistic exegesis of theurgy is
(henceforth LCC), allowed Leadbeater to com- thus a prime example of occultism’s reassessment
bine adventism with his passions for clairvoyance of esotericism in the light of modern scientific and
and Christian ceremonial. A fellow Theosophist, secular paradigms.
James Ingall Wedgwood (1883-1951), had in 1913
secured priestly ordination from an episcopus va- Annie Besant & C.W. Leadbeater, Man: Whence, How
and Whither: A Record of Clairvoyant Investigation,
gans, Arnold Harris Mathew (1852-1919), whose
Adyar: Theosophical Publishing House, 1913 @ idem,
episcopal orders derived from the Utrecht Union
Occult Chemistry: Clairvoyant Observations on the
of Old Catholics. After a break with Mathew, Chemical Elements, Adyar: “Theosophist” Office, 1908
Wedgwood and other Theosophists inaugurated @ C.W. Leadbeater, Clairvoyance, London: Theosoph-
their own Church, the LCC, premised on thor- ical Publishing Society, 1899 @ idem, The Masters and
oughly Theosophical principles. Leadbeater, fol- the Path, Adyar: Theosophical Publishing House, 1925
lowing his LCC episcopal consecration in 1916, @ idem, The Hidden Life in Freemasonry, Adyar:
Theosophical Publishing House, 1926 @ idem, The Sci-
wrote extensively for the new body. According to
ence of the Sacraments (1920), 2nd ed., Adyar: Theo-
him, the Lord Maitreya or World-Teacher (not to sophical Publishing House, 1929 # idem, How
be confused with the Master Jesus who was an- Theosophy Came To Me, Adyar: Theosophical Pub-
other figure altogether) had particular oversight of lishing House, 1930.
the LCC, and employed the power it generated
through sacramental rites to assist in the inaugura- Lit.: Brendan French, “The Theosophical Masters: An
tion of the “New Age” which would finally dawn Investigation into the Conceptual Domains of H.P.
Blavatsky and C.W. Leadbeater”, 2 vols., Ph.D thesis,
with his overshadowing of the young Krishnamurti.
Department of Religion Studies, University of Sydney,
Leadbeater’s preparations for the Coming were 2000 @ Gregory Tillett, The Elder Brother: A biogra-
compromised when, in 1929, Krishnamurti closed phy of Charles Webster Leadbeater, London: Rout-
down the Order of the Star in the East and dis- ledge, 1982.
avowed his quasi-messianic réle, leading to a mass
attrition in membership of the Society. Neverthe- BRENDAN FRENCH
less, Leadbeater continued resolutely in his occult
training of Theosophical youth (particularly at The Leene, Jan > Rijckenborgh, Jan van
Manor in Sydney, Australia) and in inaugurating
new theurgic enterprises. He promoted the exis- Le Fevre de La Boderie, Guy, * 9.8.1541
tence of a previously unknown member of the Falaise, | 10.6.1598 Falaise
Theosophical Masters hierarchy, the World Mother,
and installed a quasi-priesthood in her service: “the Le Fevre received his education in Caen, then in
Seven Virgins of Java”. His last endeavour, the Paris, where he learned Hebrew, Arabic and Syriac.
Egyptian Rite of the Ancient Mysteries, was He became a disciple of + Guillaume Postel and a
the logical culmination of his Theosophical career familiar of the duke of Alengon, brother of Henri
as it promised guaranteed entry — via initiation — Ill. His first important work was a Latin version of

--- Page 111 ---
687 LEFEVRE D’ETAPLES
the Syriac New Testament, made in 1560 (Ant- translation of the Zohar and read this treatise in the
werp: Plantin 1571). In view of the interest that this first edition issued in Mantua in 1558. In La Galli-
work had raised, in 1568 Le Févre was invited by ade, he develops a political vision based on a mys-
Arius Montanus to assist in the production of the tical conception of history. This epic poem is a kind
Antwerp Polyglot. He went to Antwerp with his of spiritual history of the French nation. Le Fevre
brother Nicolas who was also an Orientalist. Into claims that the Nordic bards of ancient Gaul, under
his famous Biblia Polyglotta, he inserted a Dictio- their King Bardus, were the fountainhead of all
narium syro-chaldaicum. In 1571, he published arts and philosophy, and especially of the knowl-
L’Encyclie des secrets de l’Eternité: a long poem of edge of cosmic harmony. Much later, that tradition
Roman Catholic apologetics, with references to > was supposedly passed on to Orpheus and Plato.
Neoplatonism and Christian kabbalah [-> Jewish Placing himself in the tradition of Annius of
Influences III]. In 1572 he returned to France where Viterbo (ca. 1432-1502), Le Fevre’s purpose was to
he was appointed as secretary and interpreter in the reveal God’s plans concerning the Gallic people,
service of the Duke of Alencgon. This position elected to be the pinnacle of the human adventure
brought him into contact with men like Baif, and eventually to return to the East, the origin of
Dorat, Ronsard, Vauquelin de La Fresnaye, etc. the translatio imperii et studii (passed on, after the
Between 1578 and 1582 new translations fol- Hebrews, by the way of the Egyptians, the Greeks,
lowed: of three treatises by > Ficino (De la Reli- the Romans and the Italians). Le Fevre compared
gion chrestienne, Discours de l’honneste amour, himself to David and Orpheus, and considered
Trois livres de la vie), of two by > Giovanni Pico himself a poet as well as a priest. His political,
della Mirandola (De la dignité de l’homme, Com- apologetical and theological concepts are based
mentaire sur la chanson d’amour de Jér6me Bent- upon a poetic theology with mystical ambitions.
vient), of one by Cicero (De la nature des dieux)
and of one by ~> Francesco Giorgi da Veneto Diverses Meslanges poetiques (Rosanna Gorris, ed.),
Geneve: Droz, 1993 @ La Galliade (Francois Roudaut,
(L’Harmonie du monde). This latter translation
ed.), Paris: Klincksieck, 1993 @ L’Encyclie (Francois
was intrumental in spreading Giorgi’s book (origi-
Roudaut, ed.), Paris: Champion, forthcoming.
nally published in Latin as De Harmonia Mundi,
1525), one of the most important ones in Renais- Lit.: Francois Secret, L’Esotérisme de Guy Le Fevre de
sance esotericism. In the same volume is also the La Boderie, Genéve: Droz, 1969 # Francois Roudaut,
translation, made by Le Févre’s brother Nicolas, of Le Point centrique: Contribution a l'étude de Guy
Pico’s Heptaplus. In 1578, Le Févre published sev- Le Fevre de La Boderie, Paris: Klincksieck, 1992 @
G.A. Sivan, Guy Lefevre de la Boderie and his Epic
eral Hymnes ecclésiastiques and La Galliade, a
History of Gaul: The Biblical, Rabbinic and Kabbalis-
long poem (8384 alexandrine lines) divided in five tic Foundations of a French Renaissance Legend,
“cercles”. It is more than likely that Le Févre was a unpublished.
member of the Family of Love. He spent the last
fifteen years of his life in Falaise, busying himself FRANCOIS ROUDAUT
with new publications of his works.
In L’Encyclie and La Galliade, his main perso- Lefévre d’Etaples, Jacques (Jacobus
nal poems, Le Févre devoted himself mainly to Faber Stapulensis), * ca. 1455 Etaples,
a project of Christian apologetics which draws t 1536 Nérac
its arguments not only from the theologians (>
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, > Augustine, French theologian and humanist. Having com-
Eusebius of Cesarea, Lactantius) and the neo- pleted his studies in Paris, he lectured in philosophy
platonic current [> Neoplatonism] (already made there. He visited Italy three times: in 1491-1492
famous by Ficino and Pico), but also from the (during which trip he met with > Ficino and > Pico
prisca theologia [> Tradition], which he under- della Mirandola), in 1499-1500, and in 1507.
stood as a corpus comprised of writings by > From 1507 on, Lefévre was in the service of his
Clement of Alexandria, Eusebius of Cesarea (esp. maecenas Guillaume Brigonnet Junior. Because of
texts attributed to Pythagoras, Orpheus, > Zoro- religious repression by the Faculty of Theology of
aster and Plato) and from the kabbalah. In addition the Sorbonne, he spent some years in Meaux
to the works of commentators — such as Bahya (1521-1526), where his maecenas had become
ben Asher (end of 13th cent.) concerning the Jews, Bishop (“Cercle de Meaux”). From 1526-1530, he
+ Pietro Galatino (c. 1460-1540), ~ Johannes was in the service of Francois I in Paris, and from
Reuchlin (1455-1522) and Paul Rici (¢ 1541) con- 1530 on, he served Margaret of Navarra at Nérac.
cerning the Christians —- Le Févre owned a Latin Lefévre’s first published works of the 1490s

--- Page 112 ---
LEFEVRE D’ETAPLES 688
already display the two major currents underlying ested in Hermetic philosophy — called Hermes ‘the
his work: as a Christian-humanist, he was con- most ancient theologian’, advocated a moderate,
cerned with the Classics and with the Bible but, Christian variant of Hermetic philosophy.
unlike Erasmus, he also showed great interest for The step towards mysticism was taken by means
the Hermetica and > mysticism. From 1492 a of editions of Latin translations of > Llull (1499,
series of editions of existing Latin translations of 1505 and 1516) and of > pseudo-Dionysius Are-
Aristotle appeared, which he supplied with his own opagita (1498-1499 and 1515), to whom Ficino
commentaries. Later he turned his interest to the had drawn his attention. In the latter’s works, to
Bible: his Ouincuplex Psalterium (1509 and 1513) which he gave the title Theologia vivificans (life-
and §. Pauli Epistolae (1512 and 1515) contain, giving theology) and whose authorship he did not
besides the traditional Latin versions, a new trans- doubt, he saw a source of early Christianity. Where
lation emended by Lefevre, again with extensive Luther rejected Dionysius for ‘thinking like a Pla-
commentaries. As a philologist, Lefévre is a fore- tonist rather than a Christian’, Lefevre put these
runner of Erasmus (the latter’s edition of the New works, which he calls ‘highly sacred’ and ‘highly
Testament came out in 1516); like the humanist divine’, immediately after the Bible in importance.
from Rotterdam, he judged the word of God to be Furthermore, Lefévre produced — sometimes in col-
the basis of existence, although it appears from his laboration with his pupil Josse Clichthove —a series
commentaries that, unlike Erasmus, he read the of Latin editions of medieval mystics, occasionally
Bible from a mystical perspective. Theology for supplied with a commentary. Often these are edi-
him is not a scientia but a sapientia. Influenced by tiones principes; among them one finds the works
the Devotio Moderna, he showed himself an advo- of Hugh and Richard of Saint-Victor (1506, 1510,
cate of a reformation of religious life and of the dis- 1517), Jean Mombaer (1510), Johannes Ruus-
semination of the Bible in the vernacular; but like broec (1512) and three female mystics: > Hilde-
Erasmus, this precursor of the Reformation did not gard of Bingen, Mechthild of Hackeborn and
break with Rome, not even after having been Elisabeth of Schénau (1513). Ruusbroec’s De
attacked by the Sorbonne because of his transla- ornatu spiritualium nuptiarum (originally written
tions of parts of the Bible in Latin and in French, in Dutch) was the first work by the Brussels mystic
and because of his commentaries. ever to be printed. In his “Introduction”, Lefévre
The Hermetic-mystical current in Lefévre’s work defends Ruusbroec’s work against the criticism of
is strongly influenced by Ficino, Pico and > Jean Gerson, who rejected the idea of a mystical
Nicholas of Cusa. He published the Corpus Her- union between man and God. The edition of the
meticum in Ficino’s translation (1494 and 1505, Opera omnia of Nicolas of Cusa (1514) is in line
sixth and ninth editions resp.), adding the Ascle- with these proclivities; Lefévre followed Cusa’s
pius in the edition of 1505 together with a contem- idea that man is a human god (related to ‘the
porary text (> Lazzarelli’s Crater Hermetis, in human is a mortal god’, in Corpus Hermeticum X).
which Hermetic texts are interpreted in a Christian Also related to Cusa, whom he venerated, is
sense). In his own commentary, attributed to Ficino Lefévre’s notion that unknowing (ignorantia) must
well into the zoth century, he added “lapsus Her- be esteemed above knowing (scientia).
metis” (“an error of Hermes”) in the margin next Lefévre’s lasting importance lies with his editions
to the famous passage in the Asclepius about the of texts and his accompanying commentaries and
animation of statues. ~ Augustine had already prefatory epistles. He did, however, write one her-
condemned this passage; and apparently, Lefévre metically coloured text: De magia naturali. This
the humanist and admirer of Hermetic philosophy work, composed ca. 1493 (that is just after his first
was here being censored by Lefévre the Christian trip to Italy and under the obvious influence of both
and follower of the Devotio Moderna. Further- Ficino and Pico), contains as yet insufficiently stud-
more, in his comments Lefévre continually points ied speculations on > astrology, kabbalah [> Jew-
to the parallels between the works of - Hermes ish Influences], > alchemy and Pythagorean >
Trismegistus and the Bible: he condones the Cor- number symbolism. However, Lefévre never pub-
pus Hermeticum and the Asclepius, renders Her- lished this text, and his own personal interests soon
mes acceptable to Christianity, and presents him as veered away from natural > magic.
a pagan prophet of the Christian revelation — thus
Jacques Lefévre d’Etaples (Eugene F. Rice, ed.), The
placing himself in the tradition (going back to the
prefatory epistles of Jacques Lefevre d’Etaples, New
first centuries of the Christian Church) which con- York/London: Columbia University Press, 1972 ¢
sidered the Hermetic writings to be part of the Jacobus Faber Stapulensis, S. Pauli epistolae XIV ex
divine revelation. Lefévre, who — like others inter- Vulgata, Faksimile-Neudruck der Ausgabe 1512,

--- Page 113 ---
689 LEVI
Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1978 mother to die of chagrin. Despite a difficult inter-
@ Jacques Lefévre d’Etaples, Ouincuplex Psalterium, view with the Archbishop of Paris, Mgr. Affre
Facsimilé de l’édition de 15 13 (Travaux d’Humanisme
(1793-1848), Constant did not definitively break
et Renaissance 170), Genéve: Droz, 1979.
with the ecclesiastic institution. The young deacon
Lit.: Noélle Balley, Autant qu’homme de France: Le was employed first as a supervisor at the College de
role de Jacques Lefevre d’Etaples dans la redécouverte Juilly, then by the Bishop of Beauvais, who had him
et la diffusion des traductions latines de textes grecs, paint a fresco in a chapel, and finally as a preacher
Paris: Thése Ecole nationale des Chartes, 1990 @ Guy in the parishes around the Benedictine abbey of
Bedouelle, Le Quincuplex Psalterium de Lefevre Solesmes.
d’Etaples (Travaux d’Humanisme et Renaissance 171),
During a retreat in 1839, Constant discovered
Genéve: Droz, 1979 # Guy Bedouelle, Lefevre d’Eta-
the writings of Madame Guyon (1648-1717), ples et l’intelligence des Ecritures (Travaux d’Huma-
nisme et Renaissance 152), Genéve: Droz, 1976 @ which initiated him into feminine > mysticism.
Brian P. Copenhaver, “Lefévre d’Etaples, Symphorien Returning to the capital, he developed a taste for
Champier, and the Secret Names of God”, Journal of salon journalism, writing reports on Les belles
the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 40 (1977), 189- femmes de Paris (The beautiful women of Paris). At
211 @ Philip Edgcumbe Hughes, Lefevre: Pioneer of the same time he also began to attend circles of
Ecclesiastical Renewal in France, Grand Rapids: W.B.
socialist revolutionaries, especially inspired by the
Eerdmans, 1984 @ Jean-Francois Pernot (ed.), Jacques
ideas of Charles Fourier (1772-1837), and feminist Lefévre d’Etaples (1450-1536). Actes du colloque
d’Etaples les 7 et 8 novembre 1992 (Colloques, congrés militants. Among his relations of this period we
et conférences sur la Renaissance 5), Paris: H. Cham- may mention Alphonse Esquiros (1810-1874) and
pion, 1995 @ Isabelle Pantin, “Les commentaires de Flora Tristan (1803-1844, the grandmother of
Lefévre d’Etaples au Corpus Hermeticum”, in: Antoine Gauguin), who saved him from despair after his
Faivre (ed.), Présence d’Hermes Trismegiste (Cahiers personal crisis of 1836. This first, tumultuous
de l’Hermétisme), Paris: Albin Michel, 1988, 167-183
period of his life concluded with the abandonment
@ Augustin Renaudet, Préréforme et humanisme a
of a pregnant fiancée, followed by his marriage Paris pendant les premiéres guerres d’Italie (1494-
1517), Paris: Librarie d’Argences, 2nd ed., 1953 @ with a young girl, Noémie Cadiot (1832-1888; she
Eugene F. Rice, “Jacques Lefévre d’Etaples and the would become a sculptress, then a writer under the
Medieval Mystics”, in: J.G. Rowe & W.H. Stockdale name of Claude Vignon). Constant was, however,
(eds.), Florilegium historiale: Essays presented to W.K. able to transform his weakness for the daughters of
Ferguson, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1971, Eve into mystical flights of inspiration, paying
89-124 @ Letizia Pierozzi & Jean-Marc Mandosio,
exalted devotion to the Virgin Mary. In Le rosier de
“Vinterprétation alchimique de deux travaux d’Her-
cule dans le De Magia Naturali de Lefevre d’Etaples”, mai ou la guirlande de Marie (The rose-bush of
Chrysopoeia 5 (1992-1996), 191-264. May or Mary’s garland), presented as a commen-
tary on the Litanies of the Virgin, the sufferings of
FRANS A. JANSSEN woman in soul and body are described to the point
of eroticism: Mary, crowned with thorns and with
Lévi, Eliphas (ps. of Alphonse Louis pierced hands, is crucified like her son. But the link-
Constant), * 8.2.1810 Paris, ages between Constant’s life, his mystical aspira-
¥-30°5°1875' Paris tions, and his revolutionary hopes appeared most
clearly in the partly autobiographical work L’As-
The founder, and one of the most influential somption de la femme (The assumption of woman).
authors, of French occultism. The son of an artisan He claims here to have discovered at Solesmes,
of the Saint-Sulpice quarter of Paris, and having through reading Spiridion by George Sand (1804-
lost his father at an early age, Constant was admit- 1876) and texts of Madame Guyon, the mystical
ted to the seminary on a scholarship, his mother meaning of the sufferings of the people since the
hoping to give him access to a good social position Terror and the revolutionary wars. His search for
through the Catholic Church. His education at the meaning of history and his expectation of the
Saint-Sulpice deeply affected him, notably the Kingdom of God are blended in an ultimate revela-
teaching of the Abbé Frére-Colonna (1776-1858), tion, concerning the advent of the Era of Woman:
a specialist of > animal magnetism and author of a ‘...She comes to us all wounded and bleeding
synthetic history of mankind based on a cyclical from the undeserved treatment she has endured for
concept of time. After Constant had been ordained us; she appears as once did Christ . . ., and they say
deacon, his ordination to the priesthood was to us: “Behold the woman .. .! Oh, poor victim of
deferred in 1836 because of a love affair with a cat- the world! Consummate your divine sacrifice, die
achumen, Adéle Allenbach, which caused _ his on the cross! You will be resurrected in glory”’.>

--- Page 114 ---
LEVI 690
The figure of the Virgin Mary, as co-redemptrix math -> Hoéne Wronski, who thought he had dis-
by “assimilation” to the life of Christ and his covered a universal key for the understanding of all
sacrifice, played a central role in Constant’s mind; physical and metaphysical mysteries. The expecta-
as mother of humanity, she herself was identified tion of an impending apocalypse was eventually
with the woman of the end of time. Constant’s La replaced in Constant’s work by the proclamation
Mere de Dieu (The mother of God), three years of a gnosis based on ‘the harmony of the world’,
later, takes up the same themes, with a vision of the but nonetheless explained within a historical frame-
dying Christ entrusting humanity, represented by work. Thinking in terms of the parallel functions of
St. John, to his mother. The words ‘Behold your the Assumption and the Ascension, Constant now
son’ are interpreted as ‘sealing the prophecy’, being proclaimed the birth of a new consciousness, fash-
addressed to a St. John understood as an ‘initiate’ ioned by a new knowledge. Occultism, for him,
into the mysteries of the sacred heart of Jesus and provided the key to the hidden meaning of the
the ‘most sacred heart of Mary’. Since then, it has Scriptures at a time when the sciences seemed to be
taken eighteen centuries to “engender” humanity. stuck in the impasse of materialism.
Although mankind is not yet ‘initiated into the From this point on he ceased signing as “Abbé
secrets of the mother’s love’ — secrets which con- Constant” and began to publish, under the name of
cern the coming of the Holy Spirit - we are now Eliphas Lévi Zahed (supposedly the translation of
close to the time of the final revelation which will his name into Hebrew), his Dogme et rituel de la
‘consummate humanity in God’ (note that the haute magie (Dogma and ritual of high magic,
dogma of the Immaculate Conception was pro- 1856). Claiming the status of a positive science,
mulgated in 1854). In this regard, Constant was a Lévi’s occultism presented itself as the vast specta-
representative of popular Romantic and _ post- cle of a hidden universal history, unfolding in par-
Romantic culture, fed by an apocryphal literature allel to the history described by the new historical
that modeled Mary’s life after that of Jesus. criticism. It was based on the theory of the occult
The first phase of Constant’s life and career con- sciences expounded by the learned archivist Ferdi-
cluded with L’Evangile du peuple (The gospel of nand Denis (1798-1890) between 1830 and 1840.
the people, 1840) and La Bible de la liberté (The These sciences were supposedly subject to the same
bible of liberty, 1841). The latter book earned him criteria of rationality that applied to mainstream
a prison sentence, in company with Esquiros and a science, but had been covered by a veil of symbol-
famous priest, Félicité de Lamennais (1782-1854). ism or allegory because, having been discovered
It is probably around this period that he developed too early in history, they had not been understood
an interest for esoteric authors of the past, such as by the majority and had thus experienced opposi-
+ Swedenborg, > Postel, and > Agrippa. Shortly tion, if not downright persecution. They had been
before the Revolution of 1848 he published the transmitted under the veil of > secrecy, initiation
notes of his friend Flora Tristan, which he had being required for gaining access to this exclusive
collected: L’emancipation de la femme ou le testa- magical knowledge which contained the synthesis
ment de la paria (The emancipation of woman, or of past human knowledge in the form of disciplines
the pariah’s testament, 1846). Finally, the Abbé as different as the > Tarot, ~ alchemy, and the
Migne (1800-1875) took him on as a collaborator Kabbalah. The Enlightenment, in Lévi’s view,
for the Dictionnaire de littérature chrétienne (Dic- had made the mistake of placing its faith in rea-
tionary of Christian literature, 1851: vol. 7 of son alone while ignoring these fruits of ancient
Migne’s gigantic Nouvelle encylopédie théologique experience.
[New theological encyclopedia]). The new magus became a Freemason, even
Constant was active in the revolutionary clubs of though in Le catéchisme de la paix (The catechism
the period, and together with Esquiros published a of peace, posthumous edition 1896) he had ex-
revolutionary journal, Le Montagne de la frater- pressed reservations about > Freemasonry and had
nité (The mountain of brotherhood). But he was described it as a society in decay that merely
discouraged by the electoral defeat of April 1848 ‘claimed to have mysteries’. The domain of indi-
and by the failure of the European revolutions vidual inner experience, however, always seems to
shortly after. Compounded by trouble in his private have remained more important to him than alle-
life, with the departure of Noémie, this precipitated glance to external organizations. A crucial experi-
his transformation into a magus and founding ence took place during an “initiatic voyage” to
father of “occultism” [> occult / occultism]. In this London, in July 1854. Lévi, invited by a friend of >
process an important role was also played by his Edward Bulwer-Lytton, reports to have evoked the
acquaintance with the Polish scientist and poly- shade of Apollonius of Tyana through the power of

--- Page 115 ---
691 LEVI
the “pantagramme” (see his Dogme et rituel, chap- movement found in Lévi’s writings a treasure trove
ter on “Necromancy”). If one credits the state- of images and poetic inspiration. Lévi’s works have
ments of > Arthur E. Waite, based on memories been regularly reprinted to the present day.
confided to him by Madame Gebhardt, a German
occultist who had been looking after Lévi during Le Rosier de mai et la guirlande de Marie, Paris:
his last years, this evocation was in fact only one of Gaume, 1839 @ L’Assomption de la femme, Paris: Le
Gallois, 1841 La Bible de la liberté, Paris: Le Gallois,
many that were practiced by him during his later 1841 @ L’Evangile du peuple, Paris: Le Gallois, 1840
life. According to this testimony, Lévi had always @¢ La Mere de Dieu, Paris: Au comptoir des
been the beneficiary of visions, another example of imprimeurs, 1844 @ L’Emancipation de la femme ou le
which may be the apparition of a mysterious monk testament de la paria, Paris 1846 @ Dogme et rituel de
during his retreat at Solesmes. la haute magie, Paris: Germer Bailliére, 1856 (rec. ed.:
Lévi’s understanding of Kabbalah is based on see Les secrets de la magie, 2000; Engl. transl.: Tran-
scendental Magic: Its Doctrine and Ritual, York Beach,
speculations on the Tetragram, the name of Mary
Samuel Weiser, 1999) @ Histoire de la magie, Paris:
in Hebrew, and the relation of the number two to Germer Bailliére, 1860 (rec. ed.: see Les secrets de la
unity. But his sources were always second-hand; his magie, 2000; Engl. transl.: The History of Magic, York
knowledge of Hebrew was limited to a few rudi- Beach: Samuel Weiser, 1999) @ La Clef des grands mys-
ments (he even confused the letters of the alpha- téres suivant Hénoch, Hermes Trismégiste, et Salomon,
bet); and most of his proofs rested on the mere Paris: Germer Bailliére, 1861 (rec. ed.: see Les secrets
de la magie, 2000; Engl. transl: The Key of the Myster-
accumulation of witnesses, just as in the Catholic
ies, York Beach: Red Wheel - Weiser, 2001) @ La Sci-
traditionalism of the Romantic era. This is also the
ence des esprits, Paris: Germer Bailliére, 1865 (rec. ed.:
approach characteristic of his L’Histoire de la Paris: Guy Trédaniel - Editions de la Maisnie, 1976)
magie (History of magic, 1860). Even his specula- Paradoxes of the Highest Science (Engl. translation
tions on numbers, which might seem particularly based on a lost French original), Calcutta: Calcutta
suited for rational expression, took the shape in La Central Press (Co. 1883 a(Kecunedss Yorkas Beach:
clef des grands mystéres (Key to the great myster- Nicholas-Hays, Inc., 2004) @ The Mysteries of Magic:
A Digest of the Writings of Eliphas Lévi, London:
ies, 1861) of a ‘prophetic theology of numbers’ [>
George Redway, 1886 (rec. ed.: Secaucus: University
Number Symbolism]. His eschatological and pro- Books, 1974) @ Le Grand Arcane: ou L’Occultisme
gressivist vision finally deferred the proclamation dévoilé, Paris: Chamuel, 1898 (rec. ed.: Paris: Guy Tré-
of the new era, after the fashion of > Joseph de daniel — Editions de la Maisnie, 1980; Engl. transl.: The
Maistre, and applied Joachim da Fiore’s (ca. 1132- Great Secret, or, Occultism Unveiled, York Beach: Red
ca. 1202) exegeses on the Second Coming to the Wheel — Weiser, 2000) @ Cours de philosophie occulte:
Lettres au baron Spédalieri, 2 vols., Paris: Chacornac
rg9th century. The important role accorded by him
Fréres, 1932-1933 (rec. ed. in one vol.: Paris: Guy Tré-
to the “femme-peuple” (woman-people, associated
daniel — Editions de la Maisnie, 1988; Engl. transl.:
with the Holy Spirit or with a fourth person of the Letters to a Disciple: Letters from Eliphas Lévi Zahed
Trinity), in view of the coming reign of the “celes- to Baron Nicolas-Joseph Spedalieri on Magic,
tial dove”, enjoyed considerable success in the Numerology and the Tarot, Wellingborough: Aquarian
wake of the Marian devotion then dominating Press, 1980) @ Les secrets de la magie: Dogme et rituel
de la Haute Magie — Histoire de la magie — La clef desCatholic religious sentiments and the reaction
grands mysteres, Paris: Robert Laffont, 2000 (a recent
against bourgeois and masculine society that had
edition in one vol. of the three works indicated in the
already inspired the Saint-Simonians in the 1830s. subtitle).
Lévi’s influence on the spiritualist feminism of the
last quarter of the r9th century is noteworthy, and Lit.: Paul Bénichou, Les Mages romantiques, Paris:
he was considered a master by the occultists of the Gallimard, 1988, 435-449, 556-558 @ Frank Bowman,
Eliphas Lévi visionnaire romantique, Paris: Pressesfin de siécle, both in France and in England, where
Universitaires de France, 1969 # Paul Chacornac,
~ Waite, his main English translator, spread his
Eliphas Lévi: Rénovateur de l’occultisme en France,
influence widely. He was also a respected name in Paris: Chacornac, 1926 (repr.: Paris: Editions Tradi-
masonic circles, notably in the United States tionnelles, 1989) @ Jean-Pierre Laurant, L’ésotérisme
through the intermediary of Albert Pike (1809- chrétien en France au XIX® siécle, Lausanne: VAge
1891), who plagiarized him. Finally, it must be d’Homme, 1992, esp. 101-117 @ Christopher McIn-
noted that his influence went well beyond the tosh, Eliphas Lévi and the French Occult Revival, Lon-
don: Rider & Co., 1972 @ Alain Mercier, Les Sources
restricted circles of occultism and fin-de-siécle spir-
ésotériques et occultes de la poésie symboliste (1870-
itualism, and reached, perhaps in a more discreet 1914): I Le Symbolisme francais, Paris: Editions A.-G.
way, literary figures as famous and respected as Nizet, 1969 @ idem, Eliphas Lévi et la pensée magique,
Victor Hugo (1802-1885) and Charles Baudelaire Paris: Seghers, 1974 @ Francois Secret, “Eliphas Lévi et
(1821-1867). More generally, the French symbolist la Kabbale”, Charis: Archives de l’Unicorne i (1988),

--- Page 116 ---
LEVI 692
5-30 @ Robert L. Uzzel, The Kabbalistic Thought of chemistry, psychology, biology, and so on. More-
Eliphas Lévi and Its Influence on Modern Occultism in over, to increase his prestige, he affirmed that The
America, Ph.D. dissertation, Baylor University 1995 @ Grand Council of the Ordre Rose Croix of France
Thomas A. Williams, Eliphas Lévi: Master of Occul- had named him supreme dignitary of the Order for
tism, Tuscaloosa: The University of Alabama Press,
North America. The document that he produced to
1975.
this effect, strangely entitled Pronunziamento, was
JEAN-PIERRE LAURANT soon followed by other texts. These stated that the
Order went back to pharaoh Tutmosis III, that is,
to the 16th century BCE, and that in 1916 Mem-
Lewis, Harvey Spencer, * 25.11.1883 phis was the world center of AMORC, while
Frenchtown (New Jersey), + 2.8.1939, another document dating from the same year had
San Jose (California) the supreme chief of the Order residing in Tibet.
In 1918, Lewis gave rise to questioning and
Of both Welsh and German descent, Lewis was doubt among the members of his organization
raised in Protestantism. Gifted with a fertile imagi- when he issued gold bonds for the construction of
nation and motivated by a boundless ambition, he a Rosicrucian temple in New York. Lewis was put
devoted most of his life to promoting various Rosi- under examination for misappropriation of funds,
crucian societies [~ Rosicrucianism]. but charges against him were soon dropped due to
Having accompanied his father in 1909 on a lack of evidence, and the legend continued to fol-
business trip to France, he devised a first legend. low its course. He was presented as the one chosen
Perhaps influenced by the “Society of the Tower” in to reveal that Christian Rosenkreutz’s coffin had
Goethe’s novel Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre (Wil- been transported, at the end of the 17th century, to
helm Meister’s Apprenticeship), but more probably the Pacific coast of the United States, to a secret
in reference to the Tower of Olympus in the Chem- location, known to Lewis, who had supposedly
ical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz, he imag- discovered the intact body of the founder of the
ined a meeting with a venerable hierophant living Society.
in an old dungeon in Toulouse. This hierophant Lewis then set himself up in San Francisco where,
had initiated him into the Ordo Rosae Crucis, had through the subsidies of a rich executive and the
him participate in an I//uminati meeting and put support of an Episcopalian pastor, he organized
him in charge of spreading the Rosy Cross in Amer- the Pristine Church of Rosicruciae of which he
ica. This Order, which according to Lewis was ‘the made himself bishop, and where he ordained
most powerful organization in the world’, had priests, organized a Rosicrucian liturgy, and set up
allegedly counted kings of France and emperors of a university as well as a radio transmitter. As for
Germany among its members, and several kings of AMORC, Lewis had himself proclaimed its Imper-
England had been its Grand Masters. The juris- ator for North America, and he mentioned the exis-
diction of Aquitaine had been created by Charle- tence of foreign branches in Egypt, India, France,
magne, and > Martinés de Pasqually has supposedly and Germany. Influenced by the > Hermetic Order
been part of it in the 18th century. of the Golden Dawn, to which > A.E. Waite seems
Another version has Lewis benefit from numer- to have given a strong impetus, Lewis was also very
ous reincarnations that would explain his great interested in the Societas Rosicruciana In Anglia
esoteric knowledge, and claims that, under the (S.R.L.A.) founded in 1866 and reserved for Mas-
cover of a psychoanalytic practice in New York, he ter Masons. This European brotherhood incited
had reassembled the members of a Society of Rosi- Sylvester Gould to constitute in 1908 a Societas
crucian Studies, some of whom had been initiated Rosicruciana In America, and at his death in 1909,
in France between 1900 and 1909. In 1905, Lewis Lewis instituted himself as his spiritual heir. He
had supposedly been named Supreme Dignitary of also called himself “Ilustrious Knight (Templar) of
the Ordo Rosae Crucis. the Order of Kadosch, and Companion of the Holy
In fact, a Rosicrucian society did not appear in Grail”. This title corresponded to the VI° grade
America until 1915, and it included only very few of the ~ Ordo Templi Orientis (O.T.O.), which
people. It was at this time, according to Lewis, that appeared in 1912, its Grand Masters being > Aleis-
the denomination Ancient and Mystical Ordo ter Crowley in England and Theodor Reuss in Ger-
Rosae Crucis (AMORC) had been chosen. In May many. Always in search of new titles, Lewis had
1915, this first active Rosicrucian lodge met in New himself admitted in 1920 to The Great White
York. During the sessions, Lewis is said to have Brotherhood Lodge of Buddhist and Tibetan inspi-
revealed unprecedented knowledge in physics, ration. Having proclaimed himself “Imperator Rex

--- Page 117 ---
693 LIST
of the AMORC throughout the World”, he es- Aryan religion. In 1908 he founded the List Society
tablished the seat of his association in San Jose, in Vienna, supported by many prominent German
California. nationalists and Theosophists, to sponsor his Ario-
Toward 1930, Lewis felt a desire to return to Germanic researches into the priesthood of the
sources in Germany, where the Rosicrucian myth ancient Germans and its secret heritage. In r911 he
had appeared toward 1610. Once again, he dis- founded the Hoher Armanen-Orden (HAO), a
played his fertile imagination in composing a new modern revival of the ancient Armanist priesthood.
Fama Fraternitatis and writing: “The C.R.C. of Between 1908 and 1914 appeared a major series of
Germany, that was so famous in the 17th century, Ario-Germanic research publications. List exerted
was one of the descendants of the first C.R.C. influence on the secret, quasi-masonic nationalist
and... our Imperator in America has . . . received Germanenorden (founded 1912), a forerunner of
a direct transfusion of his blood’. In 1934, Lewis the National Socialist (Nazi) Party. He was a major
participated in the creation, in Brussels, of the inspiration for studies of occult nationalist heritage
Federatio Universalis Dirigens Ordines Societasque among followers of > Ariosophy. Weakened by
Initiationis (FUDOSI) that gave new momentum wartime shortages, List died in Berlin while travel-
to AMORC in America. Lewis had research labo- ling to recuperate on an estate in North Germany.
ratories built in San Jose in the Rosicrucian Park of The son of a Vienna leather-goods dealer, List
California, thus tending to materialize an ideal city early developed a love of nature and the Austrian
aligned with the utopian ideas of > Francis Bacon’s countryside. From 1877 List devoted himself to
New Atlantis. After a tour through Egypt and var- freelance journalism, writing articles for German
ious European countries, Harvey Spencer Lewis nationalist newspapers on localities and landscape
died in 1939 in his vast Californian foundation. coloured by a pagan interpretation of place-names,
folklore and legends, later anthologised in his book
The Symbolic Prophecy of the Great Pyramid, San Deutsch-mythologische Landschaftsbilder (1891).
Jose: A.M.O.R.C., 1972 @ Rosicrucian Questions and
List achieved modest acclaim as a nationalist
Answers with Complete History of the Rosicrucian
author with his two-volume historical novel Car-
Order, San Jose: A.M.O.R.C., 1984 Rosicrucian
Principles for Home and Business, San _ Jose: nuntum (1888). The novel takes as its background
A.M.O.R.C., 1987 @ Lewis, Ralph, Cosmic Mission the attack of the local Germanic tribes of the Quadi
Fulfilled, San Jose: AM.O.R.C., 1978. and Marcomanni against the Roman legionary
town of Carnuntum near Vienna in 375, regarded
Lit.: Massimo Introvigne, I/ Capello del Mago: I nuovi by List as the prelude to the sack of Rome. This
movimenti magici, dallo spiritismo al satanismo, Car-
nationalist mythology recommended List to the
nago: SugarCo, 1990, 205-211, 226-228 Harald
Austrian Pan-German movement of Ritter Georg Lamprecht, Neue Rosenkreuzer: Ein Handbuch, Got-
tingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2004, 99-153 ¢@ von Schonerer (1842-1921), which was agitated by
Robert Vanloo, Les Rose-Croix du Nouveau Monde, the Slav challenge to German dominance in the
Paris: Claire Vigne Editrice, 1996. multi-national Austrian state. During the 1890s
List wrote two further historical novels and
ROLAND EDIGHOFFER hundreds of articles on Germanic folklore and tra-
dition for Ostdeutsche Rundschau, a leading Pan-
List, Guido Karl Anton (von), German journal. He became a literary celebrity in
* 5.10.1848 Vienna, ft 17.5.1919 Berlin this milieu with plays and epics devoted to ancient
German mythology, performed at festivals of vari-
Journalist, novelist, dramatist and folklorist with ous Pan-German and volkisch organizations.
emphasis on Germanic mythology, religion and List’s interest in Germanic prehistory focused
prehistory. List was associated with the Austrian especially on the religious culture and spirituality
Pan-German movement and vélkisch nationalism of ancient Germany. Following his discovery of the
at Vienna from 1890. In 1878 he married Helene secret meaning of the runes during an eleven-
Forster-Peters (t 1890), and in 1899 Anna Wittek. month period of blindness (cataracts) in 1902,
While temporarily blind in 1902, List had an illu- List’s writings increasingly embraced the esoteric
mination concerning the secret meaning of the tradition. He assimilated the ideas of > Helena
runes, which led him to assimilate esoteric ideas Petrovna Blavatsky’s Theosophical Society, mean-
from 1903 on. List was the first writer to combine while established in Germany and Austria, to
German nationalism with Theosophy [> Theo- reconstruct the esoteric doctrine of his ancient Ger-
sophical Society], Freemasonry and occultism manic priesthood. Das Geheimnis der Runen (1908)
[> occult / occultism] in his studies of ancient interpreted the runes in the light of a religion of

--- Page 118 ---
LIST 694
self-knowledge, magical powers, racial purity, the German Reich and Habsburg Austria, and leading
immortality of the soul and > reincarnation. The German Theosophists, including > Franz Hart-
Wotanist priesthood, about which he had lectured mann, Hugo Goring, Arthur Weber and General
as early as 1892, was transformed into an exalted Blasius von Schemua. In 1911 List founded the
gnostic elite of initiates called the Armanenschaft. Hoher Armanen-Orden (HAO) as a secret inner
Die Rita der Ario-Germanen (1908) and Die order of the List Society. Its structure was modelled
Bilderschrift der Ario-Germanen (1910) recapitu- on the ten-grade Kabbalistic Tree of Life used by
lated substantial parts of an emanationist cos- Rosicrucian and quasi-masonic orders in the 18th
mogony according to Theosophy, including the and roth centuries. Members of the List Society
unmanifest and manifest deities, the three Logoi were instrumental in introducing List’s ideas to the
and ensuing “rounds” of fire, air, water and earth, Reichshammerbund and the Germanenorden, rad-
with the Ario-Germans representing the fifth and ical nationalist secret societies in the German Reich
current dominant race in the present “round”. List before 1914, whose influence ultimately carried
identified the runes, swastika and other glyphs as through to the early National Socialist (Nazi)
ancient Aryan symbols. Party. List’s ideas of a secret occult national her-
List also used the materials of the Western eso- itage were taken up by other writers involved in
teric tradition in order to posit the existence of the Ariosophy during the 1920s and 1930s.
Armanenschaft governing an ancient theocracy in
the Germanic world and its occult survival up until Carnuntum: Historischer Roman aus dem 4. Jahr-
hundert n. Chr., 2 vols., Berlin: G. Grote, 1888 ¢@
the present. He claimed the lodge hierarchy and rit-
Deutsch-mythologische Landschaftsbilder, Berlin:
ual of Freemasonry (List was a freemason for a Hans Liistenéder, 1891 @ Walkiiren-Weihe: Epische
time as a young man) was the model for initiation Dichtung, Brno: Verlag “Deutsches Haus”, 1895 @
into the ancient guilds of the Armanenschaft. Once Pipara, die Germanin in Cdasarenpurpur, 2 vols.,
suppressed by Christianity, the ancient initiate gno- Leipzig: Aug. Schulze, 1895 # Das Geheimnis der
sis had been passed on secretly through medieval Runen, Berlin: Paul Zillmann, 1908 # Die Armanen-
guilds of skalds, heralds and masons, and officers of schaft der Ario-Germanen, 2 vols., Leipzig: C.F.
Steinacker, 1908, 1911 @ Die Rita der Ario-Germanen,
the Holy Vehm, a system of imperial courts. These
Leipzig: C.F. Steinacker, 1908 @ Die Namen der Vol-
cryptic survivals explained why Armanist gnosis kerstamme Germaniens und deren Deutung, Leipzig:
could be deciphered in Minnesang poetry, coats-of- C.F. Steinacker, 1909 @ Die Religion der Ario-Germa-
arms, Gothic architecture, and legal antiquities. nen in ibrer Esoterik und Exoterik, Zurich: Th.
List also found widespread evidence of the Arman- Schroter, 1910 ® Die Bilderschrift der Ario-Germanen,
ist gnosis in prehistoric sites, place-names, local Leipzig: C.F. Steinacker, r910 @ Der Ubergang vom
customs, legends and folk-tales throughout Aus- Wuotanstum zum Christentum, Zurich: Th. Schroter,
1911 @ Die Ursprache der Ario-Germanen und thre
tria. List recruited the Renaissance neoplatonists >
Mysteriensprache, Leipzig: C.F. Steinacker, 1914.
Pico della Mirandola, ~ Giordano Bruno, >
Johannes Trithemius, ~ Johannes Reuchlin and Lit.: Johannes Balzli, Guido v. List: Der Wiederent-
> Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim as heirs and decker uralter arischer Weisheit, Leipzig: L.A. Kittler,
transmitters of the secret Armanist tradition. He 1917 # Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke, The Occuit Roots
considered the Kabbalah [> Jewish Influences] as of Nazism: Secret Aryan Cults and Their Influence on
Nazi Ideology. The Ariosophists of Austria and Ger-an Armanist heritage, which the persecuted Ger-
many, 1890-1935, New York: New York University
manic priests had entrusted to the Jews for safe-
Press,2004.
keeping at the beginning of the Christian era. >
Rosicrucianism, Freemasonry and its combination NICHOLAS GOODRICK-CLARKE
with Templarism [- Neo-Templar Movement]
were further adduced by List as Armanist survivals
in the hostile Christian era. Llull, Ramon (Raymundus Lullus),
In 1905 the wealthy industrialist Friedrich Wan- * ca. 1232/3 Palma de Mallorca,
nieck, his son Friedrich Oskar Wannieck, > Jorg t ca. 1316 Tunis or Palma
Lanz von Liebenfels and some fifty other invididu-
als proposed the founding of a List Society at Only two or three years before Llull’s birth, his
Vienna to sponsor the publication of List’s re- father, a member of the urban patriciate of
searches on ancient Ario-Germanic culture and its Barcelona, had come to Mallorca as part of the
occult survival. Members included Karl Lueger, the army with which James I of Aragon conquered the
anti-Semitic mayor of Vienna, numerous represen- island from the Muslims. Llull thus grew up in a
tatives of German nationalist organizations in the multicultural society, with a large Muslim popula-

--- Page 119 ---
695 LLULL
tion (comprising perhaps a third of the entire pop- Arbor philosophiae amoris |The Tree of the Philos-
ulation) and an important Jewish minority. At the ophy of Love], as well as treatises on astronomy
age of thirty a repeated vision of the crucified and geometry), Cyprus (1301-1302; where he
Christ induced him to abandon his family and wrote the Rhetorica nova), Bougie — in present-day
courtly life to dedicate himself to the propagation Algeria — where he was stoned by angry crowds and
of the faith. This decision was followed by nine imprisoned for six months (1306), and Pisa, after a
years of preparation, during which he studied lan- shipwreck on the return journey (1307-1308,
guages — Latin and Arabic — and the basic univer- where he finished the crowning work ofthe Art, the
sity subjects of his day — theology, philosophy, law, Ars generalis ultima, along with its abbreviated
and medicine. Almost all of this he seems to have version, the Ars Brevis). This was followed by his
done on his own; the exception being Arabic, last stay in Paris (1309-1311), where he finally
which he learned with the help of a slave. At the received official university approval of his Art, and
end of this period he wrote two works: an adapta- dictated an account of his life, the Vita coetania.
tion of al-Ghazzali’s logic, and the immense Llibre Next he went to the Council of Vienne (1311),
de contemplacio / Liber contemplationis magnus where some of his projects for language schools for
(The Book of Contemplation). Then, in what is cal- missionaries received ecclesiastical approval. At
culated as the year 1274, he had a divine illumina- the age of approximately eighty, Llull returned to
tion in which he was given ‘the form and method’ Mallorca (1311-1312), where he wrote a cycle of
for writing a book ‘against the errors of the unbe- 182 sermons, then he went on to Sicily (1313-
lievers’. The illumination was therefore one of 1314), where he unsuccessfully tried to interest
method, not of content, and it permitted him to Frederick III in his missionary projects, and finally
organize the mass of material he had presented in to Tunis again (1314-1315). In December of this
the Book of Contemplation in a more formalized last year he wrote his last works, and he prob-
system which he called his Art. In a rush of fervor, ably died at the beginning of 1316 in Tunis, on
he wrote the Ars compendiosa inveniendi veri- the voyage home, or in Palma upon returning. The
tatem, which embodied this system; and this was idea that he was stoned to death is a pious legend
followed by several commentaries on it, along with propagated to help his canonization as a martyr.
applications to theology, philosophy, law and med- He is buried in the church of Saint Francis in
icine, as well as his most successful apologetic Palma.
work, the Llibre del gentil e dels tres savis / Liber Llull’s Art, on which his thought centers and to
de gentili et tribus sapientibus (The Book of the which he constantly refers his readers, is a genera-
Gentile and the Three Wise Men). He also, during tive system based on a small set of concepts accept-
this first period, wrote a didactic novel, Blaquerna, able to all three religions - one God who has a
which contains his most famous mystical work, the series of positive attributes (He is good, great, eter-
Llibre d’amic e amat / Liber de amico et amato nal, etc.), the three Augustinian powers of the soul
(The Book of the Lover and the Beloved). In 1283 (memory, intellect, and will), and the world picture
he wrote the Ars demonstrativa, a minor reformu- inherited from Greek science (four elements, seven
lation of his system aimed at greater order and clar- planets, etc.). He then sets out rules and methods
ity of presentation; and this work he likewise for combining and comparing these concepts so as
accompanied by commentaries and applications. to be able to produce demonstrations (see below).
Four years later he made his first trip outside the The foundational concepts and relational methods
Kingdom of Mallorca, first to the Papal court in of his Art were almost always presented with
Rome, and then to Paris. But as a result of an graphical methods in the form of wheels and
unhappy teaching experience in the latter city, charts. This unusual system permitted him to pro-
where the unusual nature of his Art seems to have duce proofs of the Articles of the Faith, which he
caused serious problems, he reformed his system hoped might be capable of persuading Muslims
drastically in the Ars inventiva veritatis (1290). and Jews without taking away the meritum fidei (a
Establishing his base in Montpellier, in the ensuing point which had to be taken into account, in order
years he journeyed to Rome (1292), Genoa and to avoid ecclesiastical censure). The inventive
then Tunis (1293), Naples (1294, where he finished nature of his Art made it suitable to tackling all
a new version of the Art, the Tabula general / Tabula kinds of other topics as well, making it into “a sci-
generalis), Rome again (1295; where he wrote the ence general to sciences”, as Llull proclaims at the
Desconhort and the Arbre de ciéncia/ Arbor scien- beginning of the Ars generalis ultima. This aspect
tiae [The Tree of Science]), Paris again (1297-1299; of the Art permitted him to reformulate other
where he wrote the Arbre de filosofia d’amor / sciences of his time — such as logic, metaphysics,

--- Page 120 ---
696
LLULL
rhetoric, etc. — in terms of the system of the Art. By the ars Raymundi. These various currents were
writing works with titles such as Logica nova, brought together by the Strasbourg publisher,
Metaphysica nova, Rhetorica nova, Tractatus novus Lazarus Zetzner. He not only published, in 1598,
de astronomia, Liber de geometria nova, and so on, an anthology of Llull’s works, along with the De
he was proclaiming his intention of providing alter- auditu cabbalistica, together with commentaries
native methods in all these fields. by > Agrippa von Nettesheim and > Giordano
Llull’s hope of disarming ecclesiastical - and Bruno, which was to have wide circulation (it was
especially Dominican — opposition proved over- reprinted in 1609, 1617, and 1651), but he also
optimistic. Sixty years after his death, in 1376, the published four pseudo-Lullian alchemical works in
Church censured his works; and in 1390 the his famous Theatrum chemicum, and two others
Parisian Faculty of Theology prohibited the teach- in a little anthology of 1616. As representative of
ing of his doctrines. These condemnations as well this vision of our author, it is worth noting that >
as the fact that the Art was presented explicitly as Isaac Newton’s library contained eight volumes of
an alternative system of knowledge, made Llull Llull, one of the Ars generalis ultima, one of the
attractive to what nowadays would be called alter- Zetzner edition, and six of the spurious alchemical
native intellectual movements. The very generality works.
of the Art made it applicable to fields which its
author had never envisaged, or even to some which Of Llull’s approximately 265 works, the principal col-
he had condemned. For example, while Llull had lected editions are, in Latin: Raimundi Lulli Opera
rejected > alchemy, some of his followers argued Latina (Friedrich Stegmiiller et al., eds.), Palma, 1959-
that this had been only a device to throw his pur- 1967, and Turnhout, 1978- (in course of publication;
29 vols. so far appeared) @ Raimundus Lullus, Opera.
suers off the scent. Moreover due to the strange
Reprint of the Strasbourg 1651 edition (2 vols.),
visual aspect of the Art, with its charts and wheels, Stuttgart, Bad Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1996
it seems to have struck some as involving magical @ In Catalan: Obres de Ramon Lull (Salvador Galmés,
procedures [> magic]. Such misperceptions of ed.; 21 vols.) Palma: Comissié Editora Lulliana, 1906-
Llull’s system are demonstrated, for example, by 1950 @ Nova edicid de les obres de Ramon Llull,
the fact that only three years after his death, in Palma: Patronat Ramon Llull, 1991- (in course of pub-
1319, part of the testimony brought against the lication; 6 vols. appeared so far) @ Translated antholo-
gies: Selected Works of Ramon Llull (1232-1316)
Franciscan spiritual Bernard Délicieux, in his trial
(Anthony Bonner, trans.; 2 vols.), Princeton: Princeton
for allegedly having attempted to poison the pope, University Press, 1985 # An abbreviated version of this
was that in his possession was found a book of anthology, with a new translation of the Book of the
Llull’s containing the Tabula generalis along with Lover and the Beloved by Eve Bonner, appeared as
other equally suspicious works. In 1356 another Doctor Illuminatus: A Ramon Llull Reader, Princeton:
Franciscan spiritual, John of Rupescissa [> Jean Princeton University Press, 1993 @ Lulle, L’Arbre
de Philosophie d’Amour, Le Livre de l’Ami et dede Roquetaillade], who was also an alchemist,
l’Aimé, et Choix de textes philosophiques et mystiques
inquired whether ‘the bearded philosopher, as he is
(Louis Sala-Molins, trans.), Paris: Aubier-Montaigne,
called in Paris, that is to say Ramon Llull of Mal- 1967.
lorca, who, although he was a layman and almost
unlettered, had arrived at the summit of philoso- Lit.: For a general overview and bibliography of earlier
phy’ might not be the new Minerva whom the ora- studies, see Lola Badia & Anthony Bonner, Vida, pen-
cle had predicted would come to ‘reveal his science samiento y obra literaria, Barcelona: Sirmio Quaderns
and secrets confirmed by art’. Crema, 1993 @ To this should be added Wilhelm
Very soon after this event of 1356, alchemical Schmidt-Biggemann, Topica universalis: Eine Modell-
geschichte humanistischer und barocker Wissenschaft,works written in Llull’s name began to circulate.
Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1983 @ Further information
What started as a trickle, by the 16th century
can be found in the journal Estudios Lulianos, Palma,
became a flood, with the number of pseudo-Lullian 1957-1990, renamed Studia Lulliana, Palma, 1991- ¢
alchemical works (published mostly in German Important for an understanding of Llull’s relation to
lands) far outweighing the number of genuine the Kabbalah is Harvey J. Hames, The Art of Conver-
works. Moreover, in the late 15th century there sion: Christianity and Kabbalah in the Thirteenth Cen-
appeared a pseudo-lullian work called De auditu tury, Leiden: Brill, 2000 @ For pseudo-Lullian alchemy,
the fundamental work is Michela Pereira, The Alchem-cabbalistico, pretending to adapt the Art to the
ical Corpus Attributed to Raymond Lull, London: The
Kabbalah [> Jewish Influences], in accord with >
Warburg Institute, 1989.
Pico della Mirandola’s suggestions about the
existence of similarities between that science and ANTHONY BONNER

--- Page 121 ---
697 LOPUKHIN
Lopukhin (also Lopuchin, or Lopushin), archives, a position that he kept nearly until his
Ivan Vladimirovich, * 24.2.1756 death. In addition, he created specific rituals. These
Retjashi (Orel, Russia), + 22.6.1816 were, for the most part, adaptations from the
Retjashi already very complex rituals within the degrees
of the G.R.C. At the end of 1785, Katharina II
After a short military career in the Russian army, decided to conduct inquiries on Freemasonry, par-
Lopukhin retired as early as 1782 with the rank of ticularly with respect to its degree of congruence
colonel. He was appointed at the Criminal Court of with Orthodoxy. This resulted in a period of hard-
Moscow, becoming its President in 1785, and ship for Russian Freemasons, but things took a
served in the military criminal courts under Kather- turn for the better under the reign of Paul I, and
ine II, Paul I (who made him a State Secretary and even more so (after 1801) under the sovereignty of
Senator), and Alexander I. Socially and politically, Alexander I, with whom Lopukhin was in close
he is remembered as a philanthropist — first, for his contact.
activities in creating and organizing institutions The importance of Neorosicrucianism in
fostering education, such as schools for children, Lopukhin’s activities and thought is to be under-
and second, for his efforts to mitigate the cruelties stood within the broader context of his esoteric
of Russian legislation. His behaviour after having leanings, to which his personal life bears witness.
been deputized in 1801 by the Imperial govern- For example, he bestowed the name “Jung Island”
ment to gather information concerning the Dukho- (after > Johann Heinrich Jung-Stilling’s name) on
bor religious sect (founded by the peasant Siluan the island in a pond near Moscow, on which he laid
Kolesnikov) is characteristic: he contributed to out a garden congenial to his tastes. Visitors could
alleviating the sanctions the government had see a cross with Masonic symbols and other alle-
imposed on the members of this revival movement. gories reminiscent of those of Jacob Boehme.
After investigating their cruel persecution, he suc- Near the pond Lopukhin had erected two monu-
cessfully petitioned Alexander I on their behalf, ments, one in honor of > Karl von Eckartshausen,
arranging for a place where they could settle apart the other — more unexpectedly — dedicated to Jean-
from the Orthodox Russians. Jacques Rousseau. There was also an urn of mar-
Although interested in > Freemasonry from very mor dedicated to Fénelon, adorned with portraits
early on, Lopukhin did not enter the Order until of Madame Guyon and Rousseau. On one wall of
1782, upon retiring from the army. More of a the- the garden one could read a Rosicrucian inscrip-
oretician in theosophical and mystical speculations tion. Such choices corresponded to Lopukhin’s
than a Brother really devoted to rituals, he was at preference for esoteric philosophic speculation
first not keenly interested in practising higher rather than practical > “magic”. With regard to
grades. Beginning in 1784, however, he did begin to the latter, he was interested only in > alchemy,
be interested in the latter, and from that time on he which he studied both theoretically and practically;
became a very active Mason. Two reasons can be a choice that was congruent with the general orien-
adduced to account for his new attitude toward the tation of the European Neorosicrucians.
initiatory practices. First, 1784 had been a critical Closely linked to these interests and activities
year in European Freemasonry, and Lopukhin were his editorial ones. In 1783 he created a Lop-
thought he might play a positive role in the move- uchin Free Press, designed to publish Masonic,
ment’s reorganisation. Second, the masonic Order alchemical, mystical and theosophical books,
of the Gold- und Rosenkreuz (Gold and Rosy mostly in Russian. > N.I. Novikov had created a
Cross, or G.R.C.), i.e. of the so-called Neorosicru- similar Press in 1779. In 1784, both companies
cians [> Rosicrucianism], whose philosophy he gave birth to the Typographical Society, co-directed
shared, was gaining a foothold in Russia, which by Lopukhin along with Nicholas Novikov, A.M.
had just been declared the VIIIth Province of the Kutuzoy, and I.P. Turgieneiv. In 1791 all three
Obedience called Strict Observance. The main seat Presses were closed by an edict of Katharina II, but
of the Strict Observance was Berlin. Lopukhin had in the meantime they had published a great number
hardly entered the G.R.C. when, by decision of the of books. Lopukhin himself had edited works like
Grand Superiors of the latter, he became himself a J.A. Starck’s Apologie der Freimaurerei (1784);
kind of hidden, albeit most important, Superior or Kutosov’s Russian translation of a book on >
“Observer” of both his Russian and Berliner Breth- Paracelsus (also 1784); a translation by P. Strachov
ren. Furthermore, Lopukhin was trusted enough to of ~ Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin’s Des Erreurs
be appointed as director of the Russian G.R.C. et de la Vérité (1785); and a translation of >

--- Page 122 ---
LOPUKHIN 698
Khunrath’s Amphitheatrum (1786). During just Brief compulsory reading for the Russian and
the years 1779-1784, the editorial output of Lopu- Berliner Neorosicrucians in his charge.
khin, Novikov, and their close associates represents In Lopukhinian parlance, “interior Church”
nearly 30% of all books published in Russia does not only designate the fact that basic com-
between 1779 and 1792. monalities invisibly unite all “true Christians” with
Lopukhin was not only important as a translator one another, independently from any one Church
and publisher who spread mystical and hermetic in particular. Much more specifically, in Some Char-
literature. He also wrote works of his own. A pre- acteristics as in many of his other works, it means
vailing purpose runs through most of them, which that Christian Freemasonry, understood as a theo-
consists in trying to link together the Church sophically oriented organization, is the genuine
(mainly the Orthodox one), to Freemasonry, as preserver of a tradition that the historical Christian
well as the service due to Russia. Such a trait differ- Churches do not entirely possess. Among the tradi-
entiates Lopukhin’s Neorosicrucian circle from tional churches, Lopukhin gave priority to the
Western European Freemasonry, which was more Orthodox Church. But he also advocated the
cosmopolitan in character and not as prone to see necessity of grafting Freemasonry (at least his theo-
in the history of mankind and of Freemasonry mere sophically oriented version of it) onto the Ortho-
chapters of the history of the Church. In collabora- dox Church. The result of that transplant would be
tion with Prince N. Repnin, he wrote a little book a very specific new Church, the “interior” one,
in French, Les Fruits de la Grace (The fruits of which Lopukhin felt committed to bringing into
grace; 1790), in which he equated the religious existence. Such an endeavour is rather original not
Freemasons with the true Christians. This was fol- only in the history of Freemasonry, but also in the
lowed, in 1790 and 1800, by two writings of his in history of + Christian Theosophy, since for all
Russian, a Moral Catechism for the True Freema- their mystical leanings, the theosophers (Boehme,
sons and The Spiritual Knight or Seeker after the Saint-Martin, etc.) had never spoken of an “inte-
Truth. From 1807 to 1816 he collaborated with rior Church”, nor proposed such a synthesis of
The Messenger of Sion, founded in 1806 by his Church, theosophy, and initiatory organization.
friend and Masonic Brother A.F. Labsin. This In Some Characteristics, Lopukhin is lavish in
monthly journal in Russian dealt with a variety advice and specific prescriptions toward achieving
of Jewish, mystical, and theosophical themes. one’s own personal “regeneration”. Although the
Lopukhin’s book of memoirs (Zapiskee), first pub- idea of being born again is very common among
lished in 1809, is not the least important work that Quietists, Pietists [> Pietism], Protestant sepa-
he produced. ratists, etc., the theme is interwoven here with
From 1783 to 1791 he worked at what was to many speculations of a theosophical kind. He
become his most famous book. Titled Some Char- claims to teach ‘the knowledge that true Theoso-
acteristics of the Interior Church ... (in Russian, phy and the contemplation of Nature provide’.
first ed. 1798), it went through several translations Regeneration of Man and Nature must go together.
and new editions. Rather short (ca. 140 pages), this Man’s duty is to discover the incarnated Word
compendium is written in an attractive style, and within creatures. Lopukhin deals, therefore, with
easy to read. On the surface it seems to be no more such themes as the narrative of the Fall, the tripar-
than a collection of his Christian meditations, but tition of Man (body, soul, spirit), and the relation
actually it is more than that: the meditations are between Sophia and the “material prima”. Many
linked to a specific notion, the “interior Church”, of these reflections are visibly inspired by his read-
on the one hand, and to theosophical considera- ings of Johannes Arndt, Jacob Boehme, Karl von
tions, on the other. “Interior Church” is a notion Eckartshausen, and Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin.
and a term of which Lopukhin seems to have been Lopukhin’s book strongly influenced Eckart-
the first proponent. Regarding this idea, Lopukhin shausens’s own most famous work Die Wolke
drew part of his inspiration from a German Chris- tuber dem Heiligthum (The Cloud upon the Sanctu-
tian Neorosicrucian, > Christian August Haug- ary, 1802). Eckartshausen, however, understands
witz, who had never used the term but had claimed “interior Church” in a sense that is different from
in his book Hirten-Briefan die wahren und achten Lopukhin’s perspective. For Eckartshausen, the
Freimdurer alten Systems (Leipzig, 1785) that ‘the expression means both the image of God present
main purpose of Freemasonry is the very purpose within Man and a true, eternally preserved Chris-
of True Christianity’. Lopukhin often quoted tianity that is never really at home within the visi-
Haugwitz in other works of his, and made Hirten- ble Churches. For Lopukhin the interior Church is,

--- Page 123 ---
699 LORBER
at bottom, the ideal of a Christian Freemasonry Russian, Moscow 5791 [ca. 1798]. New ed. in: Cheva-
organized in a Church-like form. Nevertheless, lier spirituel [18002], and in: Ouelques traits ... (cf.
when Eckartshausen read the first French edition of further below), ed. 1810, 111-144 @ Niekatoriee tcher-
tee o vnutriennei tsierkvie, e iedinom putee ectennee e
Some Characteristics (1801), he saw in it a ‘pre-
0 razletchir putiar zablywdienia e gibieeei, c’prioi-
cious book full of the true wisdom’ and exchanged vokupleiniem Kratkogo izobragienia kathciecv e
several letters with Lopukhin on this topic. doljoctiei ectinnovo kristianenia . . .. Moscow: Imper-
Eckartshausen had decided to translate the book ial Typography, 1798; Saint-Petersburg, 1801; Saint-
into German, but he died (1802) too early to carry Petersburg, 1816 @ French eds.: Ouelques traits de
out that task — which would soon after be under- l’Eglise Intérieure, de l’'unique chemin, qui mene a la
taken and completed by the German J.L. Ewald. véerité, et des diverses routes, qui conduisent a l’erreur
et a la perdition...., translated by Charles Auriat de
Almost at the same time the enthused Jung-Stilling,
Vatay, with an allegorical chart by the author (already
one of Lopukhin’s idols, decided to make German extant in the 1798 ed., and reproduced in the subse-
and Latin translations, which he probably never quent ones), Saint-Petersburg, 1798 and 1799; Paris,
finished. 1801; Moscow, 1801; Moscow: N.S. Vsevolojssky,
It would seem that the attempt of Lopukhin and 1810 (with an additional “Notice historique”). Re-
his Neorosicrucian circle at synthesizing Freema- prints: of the r8ro ed. (Marc Haven, ed.): Lyon: Amis
de la Vérité, r901): Les Amitiés Spirituelles (Collec-
sonry into a kind of ecclesial organization without
tion Sedir): Paris, 1929; Paris, 1973 # German ed.:
breaking from official Orthodoxy had never been
“Einige Ziige der inneren Kirche...”, translated by
made before, and also that it was hardly continued J.L. Ewald, in Christliche Monatsschrift 1803-1804,
after Lopukhin’s death. Neither did Lopukhin’s reprinted in 1809 as offprint. English ed.: Some Char-
program of linking Freemasonry to religious prac- acteristics of the Interior Church of the Path which
tice contribute to alleviating the ever-growing con- Leads to Truth and of the Different Ways which Lead
flict between European Freemasonry and Churches to Error and Perdition: To which is added an Abridged
Table of the Characters and Duties of a Christian,
in r9th century Russia, let alone the rest of Europe.
translated from the French by D.H.S. Nicholson, with
With regard to Lopukhin’s works in general, their an introduction by Arthur Edward Waite, London: The
influence outside Russia hardly went beyond trans- Theosophical Publishing Society ..., 1912 @ Zapiskee
lations of Some Characteristics, generally read iz niekatorir obstoiatelstv jizni e slujbe ... Lopu-
without a proper understanding of that book’s china .. ., 8.1. 1809; 8.1. 1829; Moscow, 1860; London:
specific context. But within Russia, the reception of Trubner and Cy, A.I. Herzen, 1860; s.l., 1884, 1914.
his oeuvre has a history that continues through the
Lit.: Andrei G. Danilov, Ivan Lopuchin, Erneuerer der
whole of that century. It had a strong impact
russischen Freimaurerei: Seine Lehre von der Inneren
(Danilov 256-271) upon the Masonic writings Kirche als eigenstandiger Beitrag zum Lehrgebaude der
of Alexei $. Chomiakov, the literary works of the freimaurerischen Mystik (Quellen und Forschungen
Russian romantics W.A. Schukowsky and Alex- zur europaischen Ethnologie, XXIII), Dettelbach:
ander Pushkin, and the historical studies of J.R. ROll, 2000 # Antoine Faivre, Eckartshausen et
N.M. Karamzin. Moreover, the notion of “interior la théosophie chrétienne, Paris: Klincksieck, 1969,
Church” as a progam conducted by the Russian THOUs AO2NsO23..
Neorosicrucians in the Masonic circle around
ANTOINE FAIVRE
Lopukhin is one of the origins of the religious
thought of modern Russians like the philosopher
Lorber, Jakob, * 22.7.1800 Kanischa,
Vladimir Soloviev and of reformers like L.N.
Tt 24.8.1864 GrazTolstoi. But as early as the beginning of the roth
century and even more so later, the term “interior
Musician and teacher. Received revelations
Church” took on several divergent meanings.
through the “Inner Word”, which continue to
Eventually it fell into oblivion.
attract readers today, and are translated into an
For a more detailed bibliography of Lopukhin’s works, increasing number of languages. They have be-
see Danilov 24-27, 282-283 Lopukhin in collabora- come a model for other Neuoffenbarungen (new
tion with Prince N. Repnin, Les fruits de la grace, revelations) in the German-speaking world.
ou Les Opuscules spirituels de deux F-M du vrai Lorber was born in a village of Lower Styria, not
systeéme..., Moscow or Sankt-Petersburg, 1790; far from Maribor (today in Slovenia). At an early
Reprint: Moscow: University Press, 1805 (several
age he developed musical gifts and learned to play
reprints) @ Catéchisme moral pour les vrais Francs]
various instruments. He decided to study for
Mf[acons], 5790 [= 1790], also titled: L’exposition
abrégée du caractére et des devoirs du vrai chreétien, in: becoming a school teacher, and for some time
Russian (Moscow) and French, s.]. [Moscow] 1790; in: also considered training for the priesthood, while

--- Page 124 ---
LORBER 700
continuing to cultivate his musical skills. In 1824, be dictated to Leopold Engel (1858-1931). Similar
he moved to the city of Graz, where he would to Swedenborg, Lorber never broke with the
spend most of his life. After some time, he gave up Church in which he had been born, and he received
his studies and found a position as a house teacher the last sacraments from a Roman Catholic priest.
in a family. Lorber had the privilege of meeting the Catalogues of Lorber’s works divide them into
famous violinist Niccolo Paganini (1782-1840) five main categories: (1) Das Grofe Evangelium
during the latter’s successful stay in Vienna in Johannes claims to be a much more detailed expla-
1828, and even took a few violin lessons with him; nation ofJesus’ life and teachings, directly dictated
throughout Lorber’s life, Paganini would remain by Christ himself; (2) Die Haushaltung Gottes
his musical ideal. In 1829 Lorber resumed his train- offers a presentation, much more detailed than the
ing for becoming a school teacher, and he received first chapters of the Bible, of the origins of mankind
his diploma; but he gave up the prospect of a teach- up to the flood; (3) several works, like Die Jugend
ing career after his first application for a position Jesu (supposedly the Gospel of James), the Brief-
was turned down in 1830. From then on, he wechsel Jesu mit Abgarus Ukkama in Edessa or
devoted all his energies to music; among other Paulus’ Brief an die Gemeinde in Laodizea, are
things, he composed pieces in a decidedly Roman- allegedly the restitution through the Inner Word of
tic style. original, subsequently lost writings of Primitive
Lorber had read works by ~ Boehme, > Jung- Christianity; (4) there are several works about the
Stilling and > Justinus Kerner, as well as some writ- created universe, including revelations regarding
ings of > Swedenborg then available in German. the planets (not unlike Swedenborg’s Earths in the
He also used to read the Bible, but not on a daily Universe); (5) works about the hereafter, in which
basis. In addition, he had a strong interest for Lorber describes what happens to people after they
astronomy. On March 15, 1840, on the point of have passed away (again not unlike Swedenborg,
leaving for Trieste, where he had been offered a although the way Lorber claimed to have received
position at the opera, he had his initial spiritual the information is quite different: he does not re-
experience. Early in the morning, while still lying in port having personally explored the spiritual world).
bed, he heard a voice close to his heart telling him: According to these teachings, the material world
‘Get up, take your pen and write down!’ He obeyed is the result of Lucifer’s fall and has emerged
and undertook to write what was dictated to him. through a process of progressive densification. It is
Those first pages eventually developed into a three a school of purification for the lost spirits on their
volume work published under the title Die way of returning to God. Once this world had
Haushaltung Gottes (The Household of God), become mature enough to receive the highest reve-
which deals with the origins of mankind in a much lation of God’s love, God himself came as Jesus
more detailed way than the Biblical book of Gene- Christ. Lorber’s revelations accept the doctrine of
sis. Since then, Lorber continued to devote much the Trinity, but not as three persons: the Father, the
time to writing down the revelations dictated to Son and the Holy Spirit are three aspects of God, all
him. From 1844 to 1846, however, he joined his three united in Christ (again like Swedenborg).
two brothers who had called him to assist them in Jesus taught the fundamental law of love in order
their business in Carinthia; and in 1857 he spent a to allow human beings to evolve toward true chil-
few months on a tour with two other musicians. dren of God. Usually a human soul lives only one
Otherwise, in order to earn his livelihood, he con- life on earth: after physical death, one’s journey
tinued to devote part of his time to teaching music. continues in the spheres of the hereafter, where the
Eight volumes of revelations received by Lorber majority of the deceased are received into the great
were published during his lifetime. Two short Middle Kingdom between Heaven and Hell. God
works were first published by Kerner in 1851, does not condemn anybody: everybody judges
after one of Lorber’s friends had sent to him some him- or herself. There is no such thing as eternal
of the musician’s writings. In 1852, three books damnation: everybody will return to God (apoca-
were published in Stuttgart, but Die Jugend Jesu tastasis). Millenarian beliefs are also present in
(The Childhood of Jesus) was confiscated and de- Lorber’s message.
stroyed. Nevertheless, Lorber’s works (which he Although Lorber’s admirers claim that he had
did not consider his own, but saw as dictations only superficial knowledge of Swedenborg’s writ-
received from the Lord) did not attract much inter- ings as well as of the writings of other authors
est at this time. Lorber passed away in 1864, before already mentioned, one cannot help noticing simi-
he was able to finish Das Grofe Evangelium larities on several points. Therefore it is not sur-
Johannes; the final (eleventh) volume would later prising that today there is much contact between

--- Page 125 ---
7o1 MACROHISTORY
Swedenborgian and Lorberian audiences in Ger- 5. PATTERNS OF EARLY MODERN WESTERN
man-speaking countries. Lorber’s readers never ESOTERIC MACROHISTORY 6. FROM
created a separate church, but there are Lorberian ROMANTICISM TO THE PRESENT
associations or study circles and — most impor- 7. CONCLUDING REMARKS
tant — a publishing house (“Lorber Verlag” in
Bietigheim, Wirttemberg), which has been print- 1. INTRODUCTION
ing Lorber’s volumes in German for many decades. Macrohistory is the representation of history as
A Lorber Society (“Lorber Gesellschaft” in Hau- a whole, “in the mind’s eye”. It comprises all gen-
sham, Upper Bavaria) is quite active in spreading eral(ized) visions of human destiny, whether as
teachings received by Lorber not only in German- great stages or a procession of cycles through time,
speaking countries, but increasingly in other parts as an overall progress or regress, or as an encase-
of the world as well. Lorber has become a proto- ment of the known order between determinative
type for a number of subsequent new revelations primordial events and some extraordinary escha-
through the Inner Word. ton. Macrohistory encompasses but is not limited
to metahistory (the past explained by such meta-
Lorber’s books mentioned in this entry as well as most physical principles as providence or nature) nor to
of the other ones continue to be reprinted in German by
ambitious historiographical projects (a Gibbon
Lorber Verlag, Bietigheim; several of the books are
tracing Rome’s long decline, for instance, or a available in other languages as well (including Eng-
lish). — Several musical works of Lorber were recorded Toynbee paralleling the contours of many civiliza-
for the first time in 1990: Kompositionen von Jakob tions). Macrohistory must also take in any broad
Lorber, CD K-CL goor. prospectus of change that is decidedly imaginal, or
highly speculative. Indeed, when any such envis-
Lit.: Karl G. Ritter von Leitner, Jakob Lorber, der agement of “the whole past” is palpably mythic
Schreibknecht Gottes, 6th ed., Bietigheim: Lorber Ver-
in character one can refer to “myth-history”, or
lag, n.d. # Kurt Eggenstein, Der Prophet Jakob Lorber
mythological [macro-]history, and when it is verkiindet bevorstehende Katastrophen und das Wahre
Christentum, Bietigheim: Lorber Verlag, 1979 ¢@ imbedded in a cosmology one may talk of a
Rainer Uhlmann, So sprach der Herr zu mir... Ein- “cosmo-historical” picturing.
fiibrung in das prophetische Werk Jakob Lorbers, In > gnosticism and Western esotericism there
Bietighem-Bissingen: Lorber Verlag, 1987 @ Kurt Hut- lies a common concern to unlock the mystery of
ten, Seber, Griibler, Enthusiasten: Das Buch der tradi- time, and present a truer account of humanity’s
tionellen Sekten und religidsen Sonderbewegungen,
purpose in the cosmos than the narrations of out-
r2th ed., Stuttgart: Quell Verlag, 1982, 583-606 @ Hel-
ward events in popularly approved history-writing. mut Obst, Apostel und Propheten der Neuzeit: Griin-
der christlicher Religionsgemeinschaften des 19. und Together, gnostic and esoteric macrohistories pres-
20. Jahrhunderts, 4th ed., Gottingen: Vandenhoeck ent radically alternative reviews of the past,
& Ruprecht, 2000, 232-265 @ Matthias Pohlmann, because they seek to locate and bring to attention
Lorber-Bewegung: Durch Jenseitswissen zum Heil?, overlooked (prima facie concealed) events and pat-
Konstanz: Friedrich Bahn Verlag, 1994. terns, and disclose outworkings of truth across the
ages not noticed in “establishment” or standard
JEAN-FRANCOIS MAYER
historiographical exercises. These unusual options
allow imaginal, oneiric, mythic or “myth-like” fea-
Loup, Yvon le > Sédir, Paul tures, bearing some comparison to the symbolic
images of great transformations in apocalyptic lit-
Lullus, Raymundus > Llull, Ramon erature (as well as more mainstream histories later
affected by it). And if gnostics and Western esoteri-
cists did in their different ways appropriate pre-
Lytton Bulwer, Edward George venient schemata of history (Creation to cosmic
+ Bulwer-Lytton, Edward George Resolution, for example, recurring Ages or cata-
strophic punctuations, and great figures as markers
Macrohistory of periods), they worked with their own character-
istic macro-vision nonetheless. They envisaged a
t. INTRODUCTION 2. ANCIENT GNOSTIC descent of being from the divine into the material
MytTH-History 3. OTHER RELATED world, and then disclosed the process by which
MytTH-HIsToRIES OF LATE ANTIQUITY ascent back to the true Source could occur — in
4. MEDIAEVAL BACKGROUND TO what may be called a cosmic looping or the funda-
MACROHISTORIES IN WESTERN ESOTERICISM mental U-curve of time. What happens to each

--- Page 126 ---
MACROHISTORY 702
human, through the descent of spirits and/or souls the aberration of our world occurred, so that the
into matter, reflects microcosmically what tran- true knowers on earth could get back to the origi-
spires in a total cosmic process (or all-embracing nal Perfection after death. In this light some schol-
mythos). As shall be shown, too, it is very typical of ars hold that one purpose of the gnostics was to
Western esoteric histories that the past is read in “deny history”; maintaining that wisdom was only
terms of bearers of the same deep wisdom through found in the eternal, never the changeable. As a foil
the ages — the wisdom that teaches the un- and in- to this view, however, one should appreciate, if the
folding of the divine. These histories also often con- Christian Gnostic codices of Nag Hammadi are a
nect with theories of + correspondences in which good indication, that the story of Christ as dis-
all things originate in one and all things in turn flow closer of the divine mystery on earth had to be
and return to one. placed in the scheme of things.
Such envisagements of cosmic process and tem- During the first three centuries C.E. accounts of
poral Moments can be interpreted as reacting to who the Christ was, and what he said and did, were
unsatisfying yet more widely received Weltan- increasingly received and interpreted by those who
schauungen. Because the comforts of enshrouding had not shared the Jewish historiographical inher-
myth seemed threatened by new impetuses of his- itance. In late Hellenistic times, however, any
torical thinking in Antiquity, and because further engagement in history was not expected from par-
processes of de-mythicization and computed time ticipants in formal religious cults, or from initiates
occurred later on in the West (especially from early in the mysteries or schools of wisdom. Myths were
modern times), gnostic and esoteric reactions often carefully relayed, and the correct sequencing of
appear to hark back to mythic foundations to rese- rites made known, yet the “truth” was so projected
cure the satisfying effect of an awesome pri- as eternal, that history — a matter for elite special-
mordium that explains all time, or for the comforts ization — was almost always foreign to it. Outside
of a “recurring sameness”. Hence distinct concen- Judaism, indeed, efforts at developing a sense of
trations on the great preface to history that we find historical time-depth were not integral to public
in “classic” > gnosticism or with such a key West- knowledge. In this light, then, early Christian mis-
ern esoterist as > Jacob Boehme. Hence also inter- sionaries have been said to be the “evangelists of
est in great stages of history or in lost (even history”, because they purveyed the history of
supra-material) civilizations long preceding ours Israel to put the coming of the Messiah into con-
[e.g. > Steiner; Churchward; > Cayce]. Certainly text. This new pressure for historicity, however,
gnosticizing and esoteric approaches to temporal- seeped in unevenly across various cultures. In the
ity resist ordinary chronicling, focus on mystical case of the ancient Gnostic Christians (of non-Jew-
meanings to event sequences, and in modern times ish quarters in Egypt and the Eastern Mediter-
their protagonists despise naturalistic interpre- ranean), the ancient Hebrew past was lacking in
tations and cannot imagine the truth of history immediate connection to the new salvific message.
being so banal as to be what outwardly (or in the It is arguable that this disjunction arose because the
common-or-garden sense “actually”) happened. Old Testament Jehovah, already foreign among
Such reactivity called for the different, virtually Gentiles, was imaged by the Gnostics as an alien
para|[llel]-histories of Western esoterics who wrote deity, responsible for an undesirable material cre-
of inner relations and journeys of the soul that cor- ation. On the other hand, approaches to history in
responded with the way the whole cosmos unrav- ancient gnostic sources may be read as “unaccul-
elled ab profundis. Theirs had to be an overall turated”, by writers not seeing the point of a fac-
story, of a “golden” (even secret-associated) thread tual “baggage” unrelated to their contexts; and so
holding everything together, without deferring to it makes as much sense to infer that the past was
stereotypical forms of documentation (such as unconsciously mythicized in them as to maintain it
biographies, or accounts of wars and other partic- was deliberately spurned.
ular socio-economic changes). Paramount in Christian-influenced gnostic views
is the mythos of Christ as the cosmic Redeemer,
2. ANCIENT GNOSTIC who is sent out of the Depths of the Ultimate to
MyTH-HIsTory compensate for the mistakes of the lower aeonic or
In ancient gnosticisms, it is well known, histori- archontic powers (as illustrated by the arrogant
cal facts were utterly subordinated to cosmologic Sophia in the Valentinian system) and the evil con-
ones. The key strategy of those disclosing gndsis ditions of matter they spawned. However, while
was to uncover the prefatorial cosmic events before there is an interest in Christ (who usually takes only

--- Page 127 ---
793 MACROHISTORY
the guise of the man Jesus), gnostic literature is ered. Christ has to penetrate the mundane level of
strikingly lacking in references to Old Testament time in order to speak the salvific words of gndsis.
history. Where some attention is actually given, the Here we may speak of the gnostic Moment as a
key personages dominating the scene are from the myth-history, for Christ’s descent is followed by his
primeval history of Genesis 1-11 — Adam and Eve, ascent; and the “spirituals”, those who know he
Seth, and Noah. Admittedly there is an interesting bears the truth because sparks of the Divine have
line of figures — running from Adam as far as John remained in them, will follow him up to their true
the Baptist — presented in The Second Treatise of Home, while having to name and bypass the for-
the Great Seth (NHC VII.62-3); and in other midable Powers in an upward passage between
Sethian [> Sethians] treatises we find tripartite bodily existence and heavenly Destination. The
stages of salvation. There are three “missions” of Jewish inheritance of a detailed history between a
the divine Barbelo — to enlighten Adam; impart the (deviantly read) Beginning and such a redemptive
saving “seed” to Seth so as to help Noah during the End served no clear purpose.
Flood; and to appear in the resurrected Christ to Ancient gnostic teaching was esoterikos in its
reveal “Sethian macrohistory” as a saving revela- own right because it stressed inner knowledge
tion (Apocr. Ion., NHC II.30); and we find that which was not preached publicly (cf., e.g., Hip-
three attempts by the “ignorant creator” Sakla to polytus, Refut., 6.36), and often imparted as a set
enslave Seth’s seed — in Adam’s time, at the Flood, of cosmic secrets (in books entitled apocrypha, cf.
and at the time of “the reign of fire and brimstone” — also Ev. Thom., Log. 62). Such suggestions of mys-
are foiled by divine luminaries (Apoc. Adam.; terion could be readily connected with acclaimedly
Evang. Aeg.). But these interests, which are more “ancient” arcana, especially those of Egypt, with
concerned with archetypes than with historicity in its age-old monuments, hieroglyphs and priestly
any case, do not show up in other Sethian texts. lore.
They constitute an exception in classic Gnosticism > Hermetism lent to Gnosticism and other theo-
as a whole, considering that single allusions to such sophical trajectories a mytho-historical awareness
“greats” of Israel as Abraham, David, Elijah, etc. of great if vague time depth, and intimated that lost
are very scattered and somewhat vacuous. Such primordial truth, older than the well known
highlighted primal persons as Adam, Eve and Seth, philosophers, could be reclaimed in the future.
moreover, become more decidedly mythicized into Notice how the Hermetic treatise Asclepius
an Urzeit than they already were, interpretations of laments over the loss of Egypt’s old mirroring of
them deviating from traditional readings. In eternity [24-5]), yet looks to its revitalization in a
“Ophite” [> Ophites] gnoseology, for instance, the new Gnosis and magical reanimating of idols (23;
serpent is the true God’s agent of secret wisdom to 26; 37). Gnostics also sometimes shared an interest
subvert the errors of the matter-engendering Demi- in schools highlighting such a recondite sage as
urge (Test. Verit., NHC IX, 45; 47-8), and thus the Pythagoras (apud Hippolytus, 1.2), who was
standard Judaeo-Christian deprecations of the pri- supposed to have accessed archaic, veiled truths
mal pair’s disobedience, and the memorializing of from Chaldaic, Egyptian or Orphic sources (e.g.,
the Israelite past coming after them, are taken as Plutarch, De Isid. et Osir. 354D-E). Notions of a
illusory. In On the Origin of the World (NHC II), fons sapientiae was readily associated with the
the true “spiritual” Adam and Eve escape the Fall myth of the perfect (and even reappearing) Golden
faced by their material counterparts (115-8), a Age or with belief in the return of the Great (astro-
view reflecting other ancient gnostic works treating nomic) Year (e.g., Cicero, Somn. Scip. 7.24; Con-
Adamf[as] as a cosmic Anthropos, one prototypical stantine, Orat. ad Sanct.). It was an obligation felt
of terrestrial mortals to come and far more crucial by learned Hellenistic Jews (such as Philo and Jose-
than any corporeal human for one’s cosmic destiny. phus), and Christian apologists after them (e.g.,
There is little sense of time depth in the treatment Clement of Alexandria and Eusebius of Caesarea),
of all these figures; they function as archetypes to dispute exaggerated claims of the pagans that
enclosing the mythic plenum that surrounds pres- their philosophies had long-distant pasts, and to
ent temporality rather than being agents in a his- stress instead the temporal primacy of ~ Moses
tory. Insofar as classic gnostics narrate a cosmic over Plato and any of his Gentile predecessors. Var-
slide towards unwanted conditions of bylé, how- ious Gentile seers, however, such as > Hermes Tris-
ever, they describe stages, a process, and thus megistus, Orpheus and Plato, were taken by
implicitly temporal alterations, and they have to different Christians as imparters of truth about the
face up to temporality when humans are consid- one true God outside Israel’s fold (e.g., Justin,

--- Page 128 ---
MACROHISTORY 704
Apol. 59-60; pseud.-Justin, De monarch. 2; Lac- take on the aspect of the esoteric in disclosing
tantius, Div. Inst. 7.15). the “alternative” (“neglected-if-true”) trajectory of
revealed teachings. They were alternative to frame-
3. OTHER RELATED works of long periods and millennia that paid
MyTH-HISTORIES OF greater homage to Biblical chronology in main-
LATE CANTY OUITY stream ecclesiastical macrohistory. Both to bolster
The content of these Hellenistic debates was to Biblical veracity and encourage ahistorical societies
sow seeds for later macrohistories of preserved wis- to acquire a sense of time depth, standardized
dom in early modern esoteric writing. However, in frameworks of Ages (from Adam, to Noah, to
these later developments notions from the Semitic Moses, to David, to the Exile, to Jesus, to the pres-
environment gave historical time-depth an increas- ent) held sway in orthodox Christianity, these
ing importance — through positing “formularized” stages usually represented hexamerally as a “Great
chains. Among the Samaritans, whose scriptural Week”. Intriguingly, this model derived from the
canon stopped at Joshua, there developed the 2nd-century Epistle of [pseudo-]Barnabus (15.3-8),
notion of a shalshaloth (or chain) of prophets, from whose author was perhaps the first to maintain that
Adam, through Noah and Moses, to Eleazar and the Old Testament should be interpreted esoteri-
Phineas (Mem. Margq., 1.9). The Mandaean [> cally. Islam, becoming itself a new “religious estab-
Mandaeans] version of Gnostic thinking also lishment” in the course of time, also adopted a
reveals the stringing of such significant figures, model of successive periods marked by prophets
Adam, Seth, Noah, Shem, and the three Nuraithas warning of the Judgement (as first suggested by the
being precursory to John the Baptist as Bearer of sextad Adam, Idris [Enoch], Noah, Abraham, Moses,
Light, but Abraham, Moses and Jesus serving Ruah Mary in the Our’an 19.30, 53, 57-9), as well as
(Spirit), a dangerous force opposing good (see teaching the waxing and waning of great civiliza-
Ginza Rba). The Jewish-Christian > Elchasai tions. In reaction, the last known late antique
taught that Jesus recurrently took human form expression of Gnosticism, that of the Ophite-look-
whenever he wished (Ambrosiaster, Comm. Gal., ing Yezidis, almost inevitably came to incorporate
prolog.), and > Mani, a Mesopotamian Elchasite a dissident macrohistory: Allah created the world
by birth (not an Indo-European Persian), intro- but was not its guardian, for it was the angel Melek
duced the concept of the recurrent messengers/ Ta’is instead who was lord over seven thousand-
apostles. After a sacred lineage running from Seth year periods, or “vessels”, until the End.
to Shem via Enoch (Lib. gigant.), the same teaching The fact that all such chains of disclosures tend
reached from east to west through the messengers towards finality links them to ancient apocalypses,
Zarathustra [> Zoroaster], Buddha, the Prophets, highly symbolic and usually “underground” tracts
and Jesus, and the last messenger being Mani him- that “revealed secrets” about the way time was
self (Kephal. 1). Mani’s Syrian near-contemporary proceeding on the grandest scale. At their very cre-
Bardesanes actually came to wed Gnostic emana- ation, significantly, such apocalypses were already
tionism to a grand macrohistorical framework — of alternativist and esoteric in character for depend-
six thousand-year periods that made up a Great ing on myth-historical orientations that countered
Year astrally (Coniunct. astr.). established political rules and their legitimating
Some of these incipiently macrohistorical insights histories. These macrohistorical frames were typi-
seem absorbed by Islam (Qur’an, e.g., 2.285), cally set up in terms of Ages, the election of unusual
which emerged as a tradition also stressing truth’s figures (who, like Enoch, Baruch or Daniel are
temporal priority. Quite apart from the recognition enabled to foresee eventualities in time), and the
of a not-so-fallen Adam as prophet, much attention sequence of world monarchies (cf. Dan. 10-12).
is given in the Muslim Holy Book to Abraham, A consummation arrives at the last with a final
“grandfather” of the Arabs (cf. Gen. 16-17), a true judgement or cosmic dénouement. This eschato-
submitter to Allah before the Mosaic law (Our., logical component or sense of time revolving into
e.g., 3-77-9, cf. NT Rom. 4), and a man with mys- God’s hands has Jewish, Samaritan, late-Babylon-
terious connections to the pious wisdom of the ian, Christian and Sassanian expressions, and also
Sabaeans around Haran (Our. 5.73, yet cf. Gen. appears in Islam. In the course of time, these origi-
11-125 Isa. 45:14). Insofar as these chains of figures nal impetuses of ideological resistance, as in rab-
in late antique paganism, marginal Semitic and binic Judaism and ecclesiastical Christianity, were
unorthodox thought serve to resist the triumphal absorbed into orthodoxies, with new counter-
expansion of Christianity in the Romano-Hellen- cultural recastings of them nonetheless sprouting
istic world during the first six centuries C.E., they as a result. Whatever their context, one substantive

--- Page 129 ---
7°05 MACROHISTORY
aspect in these orthodoxies has important implica- express divine providence in the macrocosm before
tions for both gnosticisms and Western esotericism: all eventualities are gathered up into God at the
this is the motif of a great cosmic Moment from End. The Imamis and Isma’ilis locate this leader-
Creation, through human eventualities, back to Re- ship in chains of imams, starting from ‘Ali as first
Creation. As a conceptual structure this is analo- Caliph (according to Shia ideology). This imamol-
gous to the descent and ascent of the gnostic cosmic ogy, expressed as a continuation of the divine work
Redeemer out of and back into the primordium. beyond that of the primal emanations and the
prophets, is a macrohistorical frame of reference —
4. MEDIAEVAL BACKGROUND TO what >» Henri Corbin calls a “para-history”, or
MACROHISTORIES IN WESTERN template by which all time can be comprehended.
ESOTERICISM The leadership is conceived as inner and spiritual
Macrohistories of the Western esoteric tradition (even in special occultation, as the Persian Twelvers
have a mediaeval, not only an ancient background. hold), and acts as a foil against the claimed exter-
Their forms cannot be explained without attention nalities of Sunni Islam, whose Caliphs and “exter-
to adjustments made to ancient gnosticisms and nal histories” are rejected.
apocalypticism within mediaeval Islam, Jewry and Again, alongside formal Muslim theological cat-
Byzantium. egorization of the six major prophets (cf. Our. 19;
In Islamic gnoseology and Jewish Kabbalah [> 21-2), there arose Sufi speculation about the line-
Jewish Influences] we find speculation concerning age of the wise, based on “the law of [the antedilu-
emanations from the Divine that result in the mate- vian] Idris” (Ukhnakh; Enoch, cf. Our. 19.57)
rial Creation, but in these cases materiality is now as distinct from that of Muhammad (thus the
being honoured as good (rather than marred, even 12th century Ibn al-‘Arabi, Fusis al-Hikam). The
evil, as in “classic” gnosticisms). In the spiritual claimed réle of Idris, as founder of the arts, sciences
praxis of Jews and Muslims, moreover, the realiza- and wisdom, allowed for the accommodation of
tion of God’s presence in bodily existence was (and philosophy, and thus the use of non-Arab teachers,
remains) a necessary, acceptable part of the Mo- as proper to religion. Since prophets appeared
ment that points the devout back toward God. periodically, so could these other propagators
Plotinus had already advised contemplation of the of wisdom, the Sabaeans, Hermes Trismegistus,
emanations of the One in their downward course Pythagoras (Fithaghtras — as founder of philoso-
to the beauty of the physical world, with purified phy, > alchemy, numerology [~ Number Symbol-
souls then ascending back to the Divine One (and ism] and > music [Anon., Chrysia epé; Ibn al-Sid,
Neoplatonists [> Neoplatonism], although they Kitab]), Plato and Aristotle. At times Zarathustra
wrote of the soul’s possible entrapment in untold (Zoroaster) received respect as a monotheist and
cosmic cycles [e.g., Plotinus, Enn. iv.9], poured seer (and one whom Aristotle, popular in mediae-
scorn on those ancient gnostic speculations that val Islamic philosophy, had extolled as Plato’s long-
denigrated matter out of hand). In what we may distant prefigurement. The sense of a theosophic
call “neo-gnostic” (or theosophic) developments current running over a long time, with Egyptian,
within mediaeval Islamic and Jewish speculation, a Orphic and Babylonian mysteries lying behind
macrocosmic process of emanation and reabsorp- Pythagoras and unveiled by Plato, is clearest in the
tion gave a positive place to the whole human work of Ibn Sina (early 11th century).
course of things on earth in its grand looping. In Over and above macrohistories demarcated with
spiritual life the macrocosmic unfolding paralleled reference to “leading lights”, complex theories of
microcosmic experience and praxis — the divine Ages (great stages or cycles) made their appearance
descent into the soul, the (re)discovery of the soul’s in the mediaeval Middle East - in Druzism of the
true celestial origins, and responses to the One who Levant, in a Persian Zoroastrianism that survived
draws all thing back to Himself. By extension Islamization, even in Kabbalistic Judaism. These
human history in its broadest purport also mir- schemae show that Indo-European cosmo-histori-
rored the divine purposes. cal ideas comparable to Indian kalpa theory was
In Shiite and related systems — as with Imami persisting in spite of Islam.
(“Twelver”) gnosticism (mainly of Persia), Isma’il- The Druzes kept to themselves a secret, anti-
ism and Druzism (both originating in the 11th cen- Islamic tradition about a huge stretch of aeons
tury Fatimid Egypt of Caliph Al-Hakim) — the covering 343 million years from the Cosmic Per-
emanations from Allah (such as Intelligence, Light, fection, via a slow degeneration, toward a cata-
Word, Wisdom, Soul) are connected to chains of clysmic End. Complex patterns of > reincarnation
spiritual leadership affecting terrestrial affairs, to occurred through each aeon (d’ahr) to allow for the

--- Page 130 ---
MACROHISTORY 706
interplay of the Light and Shadow of the divine the inner being, not all relevant speculative activity
Truth, and time enough for each soul’s choices. The was so sociologically confined. The connection of
present Age is formally expressed both hexamerally Plato and a Gentile lineage of the wise was quite a
and as increasing deterioration, with its line of those common fixture in Byzantine philosophy and spir-
“revealing the outward religious message” — Adam, ituality, through knowledge of Proclus, and the
Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, Muhammad, and pious fiction that > Dionysius the Areopagite’s cos-
the culminating figure of the Fatimid ‘Al-Hakim mic hierarchism haled from New Testament times
(who warns of and “inaugurates” the Grand Res- (when it was actually designed to take a leaf out
urrection). Behind creation and history, however, of Proclus’ Neoplatonic frames of reference in
are the five hudiid (Christ and the Four Evangelists) the Pagan-Christian debates of the 5th century).
whose continual presence is reflected in a lineage of Byzantine eschatologists, moreover, generally took
159 Masters (sadatnas). These Masters have their earthly time as running down, yet towards Christ’s
pre-historical places in the emanation process but Second Coming, the Resurrection and consummate
they later manifest in alternating cycles of occulta- Kingdom of God, final events that were most often
tion and of personal human forms — Hermes, conceived as terrestrial. The Kingdom’s everlasting
Orpheus, Plato, Aristotle and Plotinus being cru- peace, which some saw prefigured by a chosen em-
cial among them. The final state involves a return peror, was to be the fulfilment of both the empire
to the primal sense of the divine immediacy, and a and the divine liturgy (with its angelic music).
condition of complete religious de-institutional- These currents of thought only touched Latin
izion (in which the shariah, for instance, would be Christendom in pockets — in Spain and the western
abolished) (esp. Taqiyyied?'in Abdulghaffar, Mayra Mediterranean. After more than a millennium of
z-Zaman, and Kitab alnogat Waldawair). With Christian history, however, and the dominance of
their views kept inaccessible to the public gaze until four world monarchy and hexameral Great Week
1985, the Druze vision has been most responsible age theory, an alternative macrohistorical envis-
for associating the esoteric with secrecy. agement appeared in the West. Calabrian Cister-
In the tradition of > Zoroaster (who has no place cian monk Joachim of Fiore (or Joachim of Flora,
in Druze models), we find another countervailing t+ 1202) innovatively reconstrued the whole tem-
macrohistorical paradigm preserved, that of four poral order into three great Stages — of the Father
tri-millennial Ages from Creation to the General (the Old Testament events), the Son (Christ and the
Resurrection (cf. Bundahishn). roth century north time of the Church), and the Holy Spirit (the emer-
Iranian Shiite AbQ Hatim Razi (Kitab A’lam al- gent time of contemplation, perfection, and the dis-
Obowwat) was even prepared to accommodate mantling of ecclesiastical structures, soon to be
Zoroastrian proclivities in his vision of a grand cos- realized terrestrially while still bearing eschatolog-
mic cycle (dawr a@zam). It coupled a cosmic devo- ical import). In this picturing Jesus now came to be
lution downwards (via a universal pre-historical placed in the centre of historical time, and, most
Adam) to the terrestrial order and then a rising back significantly, the model was one of humanity’s spir-
again through periodic resurrections in angelic itual progress.
orders to the final home of the true spiritual know- Joachim travelled through Byzantine territory
ers. This takes place over seven Ages, each with its and the Near East and his writing reflects a reactiv-
Enunciator, and all monitored by the one occult ity toward macrohistorical cross-currents at the
archangelic Imam. As for developing Jewish Kab- time. His triadic procession recalls the “economic”
balism, speculations about the cosmologic emana- Trinitarianism of Marcellus of Ancyra, who saw
tions out of the Infinite (En-Sof), contemplated in Creation expressing the sequential activity of
divine numbers and letters, were eventually supple- Father, Son, and Spirit (and whose orthodoxy was
mented by models of great Ages, decreasing in conceded by the Western church in 340). Joachim’s
length over time like the Indian yugas, each being stages have (imam-like) Enunciators — Isaiah (and
numerologically weighted, and the whole process king Uzziah) in the Age of the Father heralding
tending towards the need for a messianic fulfilment Christ, for example, and Benedict in the Age of the
(Sef. ha-Temuna) and a Great Peace (as in Mai- Son fore-announcing the ordo contemplativus -
monides, Hil. Melach U’milch. 12.1). reminiscent of Middle Eastern speculations, The
Certain Byzantine schools possessed affinities Age of the Holy Spirit, devoid of typical apocalyp-
with these Middle Eastern visualizations. Although tic trials, looks much more like a Maimonidean
ascetics had a virtual monopoly over what was Great Peace or Druze Endzeit of de-institutional-
esoterikon, gnostikon, mustikon and aporréton ization (Concord. Nov. Vet. Test. Il) than a crown-
(secret), or over the whole practised spirituality of ing empire. We can note here a comparable cosmic

--- Page 131 ---
LD MACROHISTORY
processionalism involving history with mediaeval of temporality that went with them, were to be
Balkan neo-Manichaeism, the Bogomiles [> Bogo- absorbed and reinvented in different ways as a
milism] believing themselves especially left on earth more distinctly Western esoteric aire de famille that
with the Holy Spirit, to escape matter in ethereal intensified through modern times.
bodies at death. If Joachim creatively responded to
an arena of competing macrohistories, however, 5. PATTERNS OF EARLY MODERN
his innovation lies in an optimism that surpassed WESTERN ESOTERIC MACROHISTORY
both the Western resignation toward human vicis- Modern Western esoterists have dealt with this
situdes through the ages and notions of general large inheritance in different, if related ways. To
degeneration favoured in the East. make sense of the complex material, a general
For projecting a great spiritual Stage without chronological sequencing of the main patterns is to
ecclesiastical structures Joachim’s theology came be preferred here.
under official (post-mortem) criticism in 1215 (ata Italian high Renaissance thinkers are well known
time when his beliefs would be unfairly associated for their interest in an ancient stream of wisdom.
with heresies of the western “Manichees” [> Stimulating this was the fact that newly accessed
Catharism] in southern France). Thereafter his Greek texts of Plato came with the Corpus Her-
method of marking time’s mysteries was deployed, meticum |-> Hermetic Literature] and the Oracula
elaborated upon, and readjusted by the “alterna- Chaldaica virtually attached to them, in an ar-
tivist” tradition of the Spiritual Franciscans (Frati- rangement fostered by such Byzantines as Michael
celli), who criticized the wealth of the visible Psellos and Gemistus Plethon (with the latter inno-
Church. Joachimism became more pessimistic and vatively, if incorrectly, ascribing the Oracles to
catastrophist, and affected by hopes in some last Zoroaster). When the founder of the Florentine
and “spiritual” emperor (e.g., Charlemagne redi- Academy > Marsilio Ficino translated and ex-
vivus). Overall, though, an accentuation of mysti- pounded Plato (1462-1484), he justified his atten-
cally-charged symbols, a special interest in crucial tions by writing of six “ancient (prisci) doctors in
reincarnations (Elijah as John the Baptist), and the religion” that reflected the influence of Moses
quest to unlock the mysteries of time and the Apoc- among the Gentiles (e.g., Theol. Platon. 17.1). The
alypse make the inspirations of Joachim(ism) very six were placed in a strict succession or direct line
appealing to modern Western esotericists. of transmission running (after Moses) from Zoro-
Other special expressions of macrohistorical aster, through Hermes, Orpheus, Aglaophemus
interest in the mediaeval arena may be mentioned (cf. Iamblichus. Vit. Pythag. 146) and Pythagoras,
to complete the background. The understanding to Plato. Plato, already taken to acknowledge
that Noah was the first inheritor of the moral truths Orpheus and Pythagoras as his own heralds (cf.,
held in common by the traditions discussed above, Phaed.; Resp. 363C-364E; 600A-B), was thus heir
and that the effect of his teaching had lasted so long to a long tradition of truth, and one with Biblical
in human affairs (see Gen. 9:8-9; Our. 71; Bab. foundations. Ficino’s associate > Pico della Miran-
Talm., Sanhed. 56a-b), suggested the need to per- dola added to the prisca theologia the Kabbalah,
sist with rapprochement through the years — and which he saw as Christian mysteries delivered to
ply a subterranean, “non-establishment” route - the few in the wilderness at the time of Torah long
because these monotheistic groups had to deal with before the Incarnation (Homin. dign. [1486]).
each other. Coming into this story are > Ramon While this step could be taken as a supplement to
Llull from the Baleiric Isles, with dialogical meth- the succession model, however (so that not long
ods (Lib. Gent.), and the mobile Knights Templar, after > Johann Reuchlin was also linking Pytha-
who evoked an ideal of the temple at Jerusalem as gorean and kabbalistic insights), Pico potentially
if it were the mysterious centre-piece of both time broke open the “biographical chain”. The “peren-
and space (an approach in “conversation” with nial fountain” of truth might be accessed not in one
Jewish messianic hopes and Druze speculative line but at various points — in the ideals of Solon the
ideas about Solomon). Old notions of the “Zodia- legislator, even in the Quran, Muslim philosophy
cal Man”, that conceive the human being not only and mediaeval scholastics -, a view recalling >
as a mini-cosmos or geography (see the Naassenes; Nicolaus of Cusa, who, made a cardinal 40 years
Macrobius) but as reflecting temporal phases that earlier, had been in search for a universal religion
could be charted astrologically (see > Al-Kindi and that gathered up all essential truths shared between
Ma’ashar), were passed down among the al- the Bible and Gentiles.
chemists, scholastics and courtiers of the mediaeval Thus, while the imago of a special (macro-)his-
West. These concerns, and the the general pictures tory of extra-Biblical founts of divine disclosures

--- Page 132 ---
MACROHISTORY 708
famously crystallized in the Renaissance, it could restoration of the “the true philosophy” in con-
be taken in quite different directions. It could be temporary times.
added to, filled out in terms of world history; and The strikingly dissident voice of the wandering
interpreted further in terms of veiled mysteries. Neapolitan - Giordano Bruno took up these
Thus French Renaissance Kabbalist > Guy Lefévre implications in the 1580s. He deployed the pagan
de la Boderie added the ancient Druids to the line- lineage of truth to justify his idiosyncratic, panthe-
age, and, after Plato, “Dionysius-St. Deny” (the istic-looking cosmology. Appealing to Atomists
Areopagite); he took the ancient theologians to (e.g., Democritus) and other pre-Socratics (e.g.,
have geographical responsibilities - Zoroaster Heraclitus), he taught that humans constantly
bearing truth to the Bactrians, Hermes to Egypt, “come and go, pass and repass” in an unprece-
Orpheus to Thrace, Pythagoras to Magna Graecia, dently wide universe, amid mutations with no
the Druids to Gaul — but all deliberately veiled “the apparent Beginning or End (Cena, V). Bruno’s
secret sciences” in obscurity (Galliade). As with macrocosmos, animated by a vast host of “intelli-
Pico, there are chronological breaks in the se- gible beings”, and with matter possessing its own
quencing, and for this reason we can talk more of principles of movement, operated in complex cor-
“stepping stones” or recurrent instantiations of respondence with human purposes and affairs. An
Wisdom’s expressions through time. intellectual genealogy of the wise was claimed to
The most famous Renaissance exponent of this have transmitted this world-picture down through
“pagan trajectory of Truth” was bishop Agostino the ages — from a Golden time in Egypt and Chal-
Steuco, whose book on the “perennial philosophy” daea, through the Persian Zoroaster, the Indian
was published in 1540. But Steuco set the prisci gymnosophists, the Thracian Orpheus, the Greek
theologi in a wider history of both continuity and pre-Socratics, and the Latin (atomistic) Lucretius.
degradation from a “golden time”. A single Truth, It was based on a prisca theologia as old as Moses,
or a single Wisdom, has been constantly available found in the divinely inspired Hermes, who was
to all periods, but not equally accessed; in the first concerned with the animations of matter (includ-
Adamic period it was known perfectly and imme- ing theurgy). To cap off this history, Bruno took the
diately; then in the second it dissipates and loses Hermetic vision to be heliocentric, so that his own
unity; and finally in the third it falls forgotten and time was witnessing a decisive restoration of Egyp-
obscured (and thus in need of such seers as Hermes tianism, with what had been veiled over many ages
and Orpheus, whom Steuco believed to have a par- now re-establishing itself at last with the new helio-
tial understanding of the Trinity; De peren. philos., centric cosmology of Copernicus.
esp. I,1-2). Here the classical model of a Golden Significantly, key features of pagan metaphysics
Age (and later ones of baser metals) has some effect glossed by preceding perennialists as non-Christian
(cf. Hesiod, Erga), yet, unlike some Renaissance lapses into uncertainty are now taken very seri-
thinkers, Steuco does not imagine the Age of Gold ously in Bruno’s macrohistory. The cosmos is eter-
returning and is the very opposite of a theorist of nal and animated by the divine; souls have
progress. pre-existence, immortality and undergo metempsy-
Honouring pagan philosophy in this interpreta- chosis (although for Bruno only in terms of con-
tive mode was risky (Pico and Steuco, for two, ran stant rearrangements of cosmic components, as
into trouble with the religious establishment), and taught by the Atomists and Heraclitus). Thus the
thus one may speak already here of a developing universal Truth is no longer distinctly Christian,
alternativist approach to history. Steuco, indeed, as nor does the perennial philosophy obviously point
with some Hermetists (such as Hannibal Rosselli) to Christ. Most of Bruno’s chief concerns were
before him, took the adventuruous step of placing admittedly already found among his predecessors —
Hermes chronologically prior to Moses, even if considering Ficino’s belief in astrological influences
only slightly, and at one point gave Hermes equal and his interest in the soul’s immortality and spirit-
status to Moses in passing down the truth of ual magic shared with Pico. Bruno’s speculations
monotheism (Per. philos. IV,1). This opened up about cosmic correspondences, further, have their
the possibility of the “stepping-stones” of truth background in mediaeval alchemy and more recent
independently of Mosaic foundations, indeed in Renaissance mystical philosophies of nature (e.g.,
disconnection from the Incarnation (because ~ Paracelsus). But the perennialist macrohistory is
Ficino, Pico, Steuco and their like all read prisca disengaged from normative theology, made more
theologia as pointing towards Christ and the Chris- “alternativist”, and more associated with an occult
tian revelation). Something left hanging in Steuco’s thread of Knowledge.
idiom, moreover, was the prospect of a genuine Aside from Bruno’s version of it (which received

--- Page 133 ---
709 MACROHISTORY
a very temporary revival during the 1720s in John of historical affairs? We can only, unfortunately,
Toland’s anti-Newtonian physics), the idea of speak of Boehmian implications.
philosophia perennis was widely aired up until the In his approach to nature, Boehme’s illumina-
Enlightenment period. > Leibniz deferred to it in tions point towards a vision of progress (rather
upholding the unity of truth and a “philosophy of than teaching a chain of wisdom, or an overall
concord”. As we shall see, this perennialist mode regress). Indeed, Boehme’s complex system of cor-
was transformed almost beyond recognition in the respondences, revealing how the emergence of veg-
world of “secret societies”, but it was revived in the etative and animal life, not just humans, express
20th century (when of course the rich variegations the divine Unfolding, was a seedbed for develop-
of the world’s religious life were better known). A mentalist and evolutionary theories to come. The
cluster of intellectuals calling themselves “tradi- term “evolution”, however, strictly spiritual in pur-
tionalists” (> Frithjof Schuon, Ananda Coomara- port, first referred only to the process of humanity’s
swamy, Titus Burckhardt, Seyyed Hossein Nasr, reintegration to make up for the Fall of (the angelic,
etc., who were all affected by Sufism), took the Androgynous) Adam into the material world (thus
philosophia perennis as the inner wisdom lying at the Boehmian > Friedrich Christoph Oetinger).
the heart of outwardly divergent religions. They Later, in the hands of Charles Bonnet, all species
distinguished themselves from such “perennialists” are seen ascending, in ever-increasing complexity,
as Aldous Huxley, however, by insisting on greater towards their intended perfection, a view also
attention to the particulars in each tradition. mediated by Hegel, but soon to be overlooked by
None of the afore-mentioned Renaissance macro- the plainly empiricist and “scientific” Charles
histories assume an overall progress in history (as Darwin and his like. Another implication is the
distinct from recurrence or regress). The prospect triumph of spirit over letter, and mystical over
of a reabsorption of history’s changeable terrestri- institutional.
alities back into the Eternal (as we have spotted As for history as human affairs, although Boehme
them in earlier non-Western currents) remained avoids reference to it, by using the idioms of the
present — with Ficino describing the cosmic process nettle, the rose, and the lily, he apparently alludes
of Beginning (Beauty), Emanation (Love) and to the triadic Joachite framework of macrohistory
Returning (Pleasure) as a “circle” (Comm. Symp. as a corollary of his Trinitarian cosmogeny (cf.
2.2) — but this U-curve was disengaged from the also Sechs myst. Punc.). Something of the Joachite
newly favoured “macrohistory of the Ancient The- “scaffolding” seems assumed in esotericisms in-
ology”. Possibilities for a vision of progress (and a spired by Boehme (as in the the > Christian Theo-
reconjunction of major schemae) are provided in sophy of the Philadelphians and > Karl von
the West through the difficult mystical writings of Eckartshausen during the 18th century). Despite
~ Jakob Boehme, who pitched his theologically qualifying stresses on recurrence, it remains dis-
innovative insights against literalist and institu- cernable in Quakerism (after interaction between
tionalist tendencies in the Reformation (making “Behmenists” in the 1670s) and in select German
him suspect among German Lutherans by 1620). Pietists [> Pietism] such as > Gottfried Arnold.
There are difficulties in reading Boehme macrohis- The frame then gets more overtly transmitted
torically, although we can affirm that he taught a under the rubric of “the Last Times of the Third
processional cosmology. For out of the impenetra- Age” among French illuminés, a view affecting >
ble Ungrund (Groundlessness, cf. En-Sof), the cre- Emanuel Swedenborg very slightly (Apoc. Revel.
ation arises from wrath (the Father), light and love 1766) and directly inspiring > Eliphas Lévi, who
(the Son), and expands (with the nurturing Holy by the 1820s was announcing “the Age of the Par-
Spirit as Matrix, and an unfolding of its tendencies aclete” (which became for hima “reign of Light” in
and forms through seven emanation-looking Ouell- which the science of magic would be revealed).
geister or fountain-spirits). The sense of necessary The stronger component of recurrence in Quaker
materialization is strongly present in this vision triadic macrohistory, as expounded by George Fox
(even though souls have to experience the terrible and Isaac Penington, arises through the notion of
immanence of hell and darkness along with love the golden Edenic age being re-enacted in the mid-
and light), and, in a neo-gnostic Moment, human- dle of time (through Christ) and in the latter days
ity’s possible complete regeneration into the primor- (through the [Society of] Friends). Thus history’s
dial selfless state “within God” is contemplated. In three great positive Moments are the Age of the
all this, though, where is history to be placed? Christian Adam (begun in perfection and almost
Boehme conceives all phenomal existence as a millennium-long in its timing, cf. Gen. 5:5 on his
wheeling of reaction and counteraction, but what 930 years); the Days of Jesus, the Second Adam,

--- Page 134 ---
MACROHISTORY 710
and his Apostles; and the present times, when these knowledge. Works by Lutheran > Johann Valentin
earlier perfections are beginning to be recovered — Andreae in the 1610s triggered off fascination with
by reenactment - as the life of the Spirit is the abstruse message that the fabulous Christian
embraced. In contrast, the time of the Old Testa- Rosenkreutz had tapped the mystery of the Ages
ment and its post-Adamic times is that of the first (being learned in Eastern — especially Arab and
covenant, which was outward, at least forming the Egyptian — wisdom, founding a secret society to
antetype of the covenant lived inwardly, with study Nature’s hidden things, and imparting an
Christ, the early disciples, and now the Friends anti-Catholic esoteric Christianity). > Rosicru-
being imbued with the ‘true Light that lighteth cianism was early linked to political dreams of a
every man’ (AV Jn 1:9) and not fettered by “the Let- returned Golden Age in the form of a Protestant
ter” and ecclesiastical institutions. In the Age of the Holy Roman Emperor Fredererick V Palatine.
Church, though, between the Apostles’ days and Most of these figures and developments, we should
the Moment of the new breakthrough, there is a note, reflect a yearning to transcend prevailing
long period of sad apostasy, whereby Christendom orthodoxies.
was ‘built up . . . with blood and iniquity’, and reli- The tensions between hopes for some extraordi-
gious conformity maintained by fallible ‘doc- nary breakthrough in knowledge and reaction
trines, .. . creeds, and ordinances, and canons, by against orthodoxies show up in the macrohistories
force of carnal weapons’. This overall view of the of two great scientific minds of the 18th century:
past, one can already sense, heralds the claims of an ~ Isaac Newton and > Emanuel Swedenborg.
overall progress towards “Enlightenment”, even if Another figure of interest, (the ostensibly orthodox
the vision was to be radically secularized (cf. Catholic) Giambattista Vico, earlier toyed with
Voltaire’s essay Sur les Quakers). notion of a transmission of wisdom to explain
By 1700 Gottfried Arnold had combined a syn- Latin-Italian learning, and even if he later disposed
optic study of history with the Boehmian dream of this paradigm, his newer ideas came to affect
that ‘all creatures will be brought back into that Romantic “historiosophies” of a distinctly esoteric
original and blessed oneness . . . of eternal love’ as kind. Each of these three has distinctive compo-
was meant to pertain in Adam’s time (Unpartei- nents in their macrohistorical frameworks.
ische Kirchen- und Ketzerhistorie, vol. 1). Arnold’s Newton held that the fundamental principles of
outright conclusion, however, is that illumination all knowledge relevant to our present order were
belongs only to a few genuine believers: history divinely granted to Noah after the Flood. This
is just a sea of repeated follies and corruptions. knowledge springs from the “true religion” of
The Eternal Light shone brightest in Christ, and Noah who received seven precepts from God (pro-
brightly in the young Luther and his forerunners, hibiting idolatry, blasphemy, fornication, murder
but after each case comes predictable degeneration. and theft; and enjoining care of animals, and the
Arnold is impelled to draw the subversive conclu- setting up of governments [cf. Talmud, Sanhredr.]).
sion, in fact, that the illumined few might be found In Biblico-Christian terms this religion was ex-
among (wrongly imputed) heretics, and cannot panded in the Mosaic decalogue, reaffirmed by the
even be limited to adherents of the Christian reli- prophets, distilled by Jesus (love God and your fel-
gion. This pessimism, we note, does not issue either low human), used as a guide by the early Church
in a steady regress or stepping-stone model of wis- (cf. Acts 15:20, 29), and discreetly embraced by
dom. It stands in stark contrast, too, to late Renais- Newton himself as the self-inscribed champion of
sance (especially earlier 17th century) utopianisms vera religio in the Last Times. But it was relayed to
looking to some extraordinary socio-spiritual the Gentiles — the Sabaeans, Confucius, the Brah-
rebirth. mins (who owed their name to Abraham), and
Some of the dreams of reappropriating neglected Pythagoras all passing on the Noachian “basics
wisdom had been decidedly utopic (~ Francis of civilization”. Thus a stepping-stone model of
Bacon; ~ Tommaso Campanella); some pro- recurrent reinstantiation is suggested, but different
claimed the disclosure of the truth upon which all from the prevening one of the philosophia peren-
affairs rested or could be adjudged (Jean Bodin on nis. The new understanding places a primary stress
the Ten Commandments; Faustus Socinus on Jesus’ on the (misunderstood) transmission of moral
special receipt of arcana in his lifetime [cf. Jn. principles. It also sets great store by Noah (a not
3; 13]). Others invoked the probability of a return- unprecedented move, since the Jesuit > Guillaume
ing Golden Age. > Johannes Comenius and others Postel had voiced a similar prioritization), and put
at the enigmatic court of ~ Rudolph II in Prague more weight on Jewish and Islamic preconceptions
heralded a great redisclosure of “pansophic” about the custodianship and history of truth (in

--- Page 135 ---
72a MACROHISTORY
Islam Noah and Moses, for instance, carry almost “Israelite Church”, and the fourth, of iron, the
as much weight as Jesus, and it is held, as Newton Christian one. The decline is from original inno-
also did, that there was a “falling away” after each cence and true love to a mere knowledge of natural
great disclosure of the Light). and literal truth, and is reminiscent of Steuco’s
Noah’s religion was enmeshed with natural pejorism clothed in a Hesiodic “outer garb”. Since
philosophy. Thus Newton’s own work on the this degeneration fairly screeches for a New
spectrum of light was connected back to the Jerusalem or “the New Church” to solve the
post-diluvian rainbow; and mathematics derived cosmo-historical probem, however, its downward
from the proportions of the Ark and the cubit unit course amounts in the end to a providential work
of measure used for it. Gentiles had their place in of redemption: the New Church recovers the
mediating this prisca scientia. The Phoenicians Edenic blessings and possibility of a return to the
through Hiram of Tyre, for instance, helped with heavens. In the whole temporal process geographi-
the building of Jerusalem’s holy temple (using cal shifts of influence around the points of the com-
cubits) before even the pyramids were erected; pass were detected, beginning in the East and
when Orpheus and Chiron the Centaur voyaged as ending with it in a circle. Appropriate worlds of
Argonauts (Apollonius Rhodius, Argon.), the latter heaven and hell were called into being en route as
possessed an astronomer’s sphere; when Pythago- well, so that a “new heaven” is formed for “the
ras brought mathematics to the Greeks, he also simple good” with the arrival of the New Church,
bore the Noachian rules and taught God as Light and a new hell for the Christian hypocrites (inter
and Father (cf. Pseudo-Justin mart., Hort.ad Graec. alia locked in a Trinitarianism that, like Newton,
19). The true religion, however, could be terribly Swedenborg spurned). The future would now only
corrupted; Egypt was a major culprit, earlier hold “a progression of youth and spring” back
responsible for rampant polytheism, idolatry and towards God, “as it was in heaven”, with the final
magic; and later for gnosticism (including the her- stage completing a neo-gnostic-looking loop when
metic philosophy, that was now critically redated innumerable angelic, celestial societies constitute
to Hellenistic times). Out of Egypt, moreover, there the maximus homo or “the greatest [cosmic] Man”
arose the idolatrous Trinitarianism that marred the (esp. Arc. Cael.). Considering the first Age, this
subsequent history of Christianity. As a Socinian- consummation is highly significant: for the first
Arian, Newton’s agenda was to reinstate “true” time in human thought history as such is celestial-
non-Trinitarian religion and the sacred foundations ized at both its beginning and end. Intriguingly,
of science at the same time. His connections with moreover, the esoteric U-curve has woven into it
early 18th century ~ Freemasonry require investi- motifs of degeneration, recurrence, progress and
gation, for the appeal to a tolerating outlook across millennialism.
the borders of the major monotheisms, and evoca- The macrohistories of both Newton and Swe-
tions of both Noah’s precepts (as against the seven denborg hark back to pre-existing structures and
[pagan] virtues) and the symbolic importance of modify them. Vico’s model for a “new science” of
Solomon’s temple (including Hiram as facilitator) historical “coursing” and “recoursing”, however,
pertain to pre-Andersonian masonic rites. marks a radical breakthrough, being more flexible
Swedenborg’s most settled macrohistorical struc- and dynamic. Human consciousness developed
turing was more formalistic, and links with his réle through the Ages of the Gods (with a sense of the
as titular founder of the New Church. He favoured divine as immediately present), of Heroes (with
a theory of periods that turn out to be more four- great “barbaric” leaders embodying divine, albeit
than threefold in series — devolving around four arbitrary power), on to that of Humans (with the
“Churches” (thus “Ages”, cf. Dan. 2:31-5). The triumph of rationality and applied abstract princi-
first and “Most Ancient” is called Adam (thus ples). Decline inevitably comes, yet, after a great
positing a “Golden” Adamic Age, as Boehmians, civilization (such as Rome’s) collapses, affairs then
Quakers, etc. taught before him, but a celestial one “re-course” via a new barbarism to a still higher
[cf. Sulpicius Severus, Chron. 1.2]). This is the first level (Scienza nuova [esp. 1744 edn.]). Here, de-
appearance of an early etheric stage of history in spite the strong cyclical element, the suggestion is
modern Western esotericism in which the first of history as overall spiraling upwards.
humans lie outside ordinary earthly conditions. Vico’s modelling subverted the notion of an
The second, “Ancient” and “Silver” (and first ter- unchanging Ancient Theology, or a stable “house
restrial) Age is called Noah (with “love of neigh- of wisdom” unaffected by the enormous changes of
bour” being paramount, as Newton had also consciousness he described. Yet, even though his
taught); while the third, brazen age is of the influence on mainstream thought took a long time

--- Page 136 ---
MACROHISTORY 712
coming, his work had an impact on “esotericizing” He thus addressed the spiral effect towards democ-
(especially anti-rationalist, Romantic) thinkers ratization so evident in his own day, which makes
between the 18th and roth centuries. > Goethe, his esoteric historiosophy politically engaged.
who had the New Science secreted to him while a The East, particularly India, had taken on
traveller at Naples (1787), was first in explicitly increasing significance in Western speculative
construing history as ever-widening and higher thought by the end of the 18th century. It figures in
cycloids. Significantly, he described the whole Romantic reactions against rationalistic and mech-
process as a spiral (Spirale), paralleling the human anistic explanations of the world. With the un-
story to processes in plant and zoological life and covering, first, of a version of the Upanishads
taking in the idea of necessary decay before new (Oupnek’hat), India is proclaimed as the founda-
growth was possible. Romantic Naturphilosophie, tion-point of all ancient wisdom in a new, “Orien-
with Goethe its key inspirer, is crucial for a shift tal” Renaissance (that upgrades the European one,
from a more static to a “temporalist” view of cos- with formerly honoured ancient theologies deriv-
mic unfolding. Instead of the traditional (basically ing from this freshly uncovered source). Thus for
Platonic) conception of “the fullness of creation” such savants as Friedrich von Schlegel and >
and its orders being “perfect and complete unfold- Friedrich von Schelling the now recovered wisdom
ment” from the divine, now there is conceived a of India initiates the perennial religion, that (in
‘programme of nature that is being carried out Schelling’s version) moves to Egypt, Eleusis and
gradually and exceedingly slowly in the cosmic his- then to an esoteric Gospel known to Sts John and
tory’ (A.O. Lovejoy; W. Hanegraaff). Paul. In its inception this unveiling was a matter of
public discussion and affected mainstream thought.
6. FROM ROMANTICISM TO THE In the 1810s, according to the macrohistory of
PRESENT Hegel (with its triadic frames affected by Boeh-
In Romantic thought [~ Romanticism] concen- mian, Vichian and Romantic impetuses), India pre-
trated on the human past, the spiral image informs ceded the Bible in expressing the first religious and
the works of such French “historiosophists” as > philosophical universalism. By mid-century the
Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin in the 1790s and > titular founder of comparative religion, Friedrich
Pierre-Simon Ballanche in the 1820s. While Saint- Max Miller, deployed the Indian experience as a
Martin is not interested in standard histories he coping-stone for explaining religious history more
visualizes human progress through recurrent crises, generally — as passing through stages that are natu-
each making greater the possibility of humanity’s ral, then anthropological (or anthropomorphiz-
reintegration into the divine. The worst known cri- ing), and finally psychological (or theosophic).
sis, that of the French Revolution, opens up the Texts from Sumer and the ancient Near East had
epoch of a new magisme (a magical participation barely surfaced to make any difference. Even when
in the divine creativity) through which humanity they did, India would remain crucial in distinctly
can be corporately regenerated. If this group of esoteric currents of thought. Freemasonry and the
hommes-esprit hinted at Vico’s providential “Age ~ Theosophical Society are obvious cases in point.
of Humans”, Saint-Martin envisages an apocalyp- The importance of the initiatic becomes more
tic “Sabbatic reign” of God (alluding to the Great systematically expressed in roth century Freema-
Week schema) - the utter low-point of the Revolu- sonry. Thus, in the macrohistory of Albert Pyke
tion being interpreted as a proleptic miniature of (the most celebrated Masonic systematizer in the
the Last Judgement, the defeat of the Fall, and the English-speaking world), the most crucial aspect of
suspension of ordinary time. As for Ballanche, in- history is the transmission of “the exact knowledge
spired by Boehme, Vico, and more recently by spir- of the Initiate”, the great ones being “Masters”.
itual evolutionist Bonnet, Ballanche maintained that Pyke shows much interest in the general contours
accession to wisdom increased through such great of history — the collapse of empires through greed,
initiators as Noah and Orpheus, and the transmis- the overall advancement of freedom (sometimes
sion of their wisdom sets in train a social evolution through revolutions), the temporal priority of sym-
that can overcome the Fall. Using the Vichian bolic over moral and dogmatic expressions of truth
account of Rome’s constitutional developments, (Morals and Dogma, 1871, chs. 3, 23) — but his key
Ballanche saw social initiators in “heroic times” to interest is in the passing down of the Mysteries. By
be patrician, but a widening of spiritual maturity now public fascinations in comparative religion,
comes after the time when the plebeians slowly including better studied Indian traditions, have had
acquire responsibility (Palingénésie sociale, prolog.). an effect. Thus for Pyke India becomes the new font

--- Page 137 ---
733 MACROHISTORY
of Wisdom, first through “Chrishna”, then the til and surpass all former glimmerings in a system
Buddha, who is described as “the first Masonic of final Truth. Insofar as she garnished many for-
Legislator”. In turn the (Jain) Gymnosophists mer insights to bolster her position, she was crucial
planted the mysteries in Ireland (so generating the (together with such contemporaries as » Hargrave
round architecture there and affecting the course of Jennings) for “inventing” a “grand tradition” of
Celtic Druidism). In the Middle East the Phoeni- esotericism — an act of macrohistorical reflection in
cian cosmogeny, held by Hiram (the true architect its own right.
of the Solomonic temple) derives from the Saba- In Blavatsky esoteric macrohistory reaches its
eans, who provide the seedbed of Kabbalah that is greatest degree of eclecticism and combinative
mediated via Zoroaster. Pythagoras, ‘the great intricacy. Her own synoptic view of temporal
divulger of the philosophy of numbers’, is indeed ‘a processes combines three major features. It clearly
Master and Revealer’ for being initiated into the reflects the newer preoccupations with India, for
Kabbalah in Judaea and into the Egyptian (essen- she invoked kalpa theory to project endless rounds
tially Hermetic) mysteries. In masonic circles, these of cosmic ages and reincarnations. Despite this,
among other special stories were “institutional though, her primary model still turns out to be a
secrets”, and the symbolic forms used in initiations grand U-shaped “[neo-]gnostic Moment” of cos-
were viewed as the means of handing down the mic becoming through descent and ascent. In the
most ancient signs and symbols through which construction of her vision a novel solution to the
diverse peoples communicated in their first impe- threat of materialist evolutionism is provided by
tuses to find both common ground and the “divine Root Race theory, or the descending order of
light”. Thus Pyke’s macrohistory reflects an eclec- increasingly corporealized spiritual beings — from
tic garnishing of prior esoteric currents, accommo- the Lunar Ancestors, through Hyperboreans,
dating philosophia perennis, a better-known world Lemurians, Atlanteans, down to the Aryans of the
of non-Biblical traditions, and Enlightenment con- present cycle. As this descent proceeds, it is met by
cerns for Nature’s laws and its numerological basis an ascent in the natural biotic order, highest with
(as well as for both progress and revolution). the Anthropoid Ape, with the phenomenon of
As for the modern Theosophical movement, it “lower races” occurring because Lemurians and
would be impossible to account for its emergence Atlanteans mated with them. The law of karma is
and popularity without this new enthusiasm for taught as meting out justice — especially via rein-
non-Western spiritualities, especially those of carnations — through countless aeons, but ad-
India. But Theosophy also amounted to a reaction vanced souls pass beyond what is, after all, a
against the threat of de-spiritualizing tendencies in necessary materialization, and ascend back to
evolutionary thought. From 1859 Darwin based forms of (influential) spirithood above. Key spirit
his theory of biological evolution on the purely sec- Masters mediate the eternal truth via the religious
ular principle of “natural selection”. His Social great ones or “revealers” through the centuries,
Darwinian successors (e.g., Spencer, Lubbock, through Enoch, the “first Son of Man”, at the close
Tylor) construed the whole human journey as a of the third (Lemurian) Root Race, for instance,
progress from animal-like savagery and primitive and through Jesus [or Jeshu], who was but the
ignorance into the graded experiences of different innocent vehicle of Vach, the cosmic “Mystical
“races”, while the most popular evolutionary cos- Voice”, yet a fundamental mediator of Truth, like
mologist, Ernst Haeckel, espoused an Epicurean- Krishna and Buddha, for the fifth Race. The eclec-
looking materialism (from 1867). ticism thus entails a wedding of cosmo-evolution-
+ Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, founder of the > ary history with the history of known human
Theosophical Society (1875), boldly responded to conditions and documentable human (especially
these contemporary currents with a grand cosmo- spiritual) thoughts. The whole picture of enormous
(or myth-)history. Her self-conscious systematiza- processes and such hidden masters has affinities
tion of esoterica was presented in The Secret with the speculations of the Druzes, from whom
Doctrine (1888) as a complex “revelation” about Blavatsky claimed initiation. Avatar theology and
cosmic processes — based on lost Akashic records emanationist thought among the Hindus (e.g., Sri
that had been mediated by spirit Masters out of the Brahm. Samh. 5) are hardly without their influ-
ether. Whether justifiably or not, Blavatsky put her- ence, though, and logically her gigantic “Rounds”
self in a line of prior seekers — Boehmians, Masons, of time go on unceasingly as in Indic concep-
Swedenborgians, Spiritualists, interpreters of the tions. Even within the Round we now experience
East — although her disclosures were meant to dis- ‘our present continents have, like “Lemuria” and

--- Page 138 ---
MACROHISTORY 714
“Atlantis”, been several times already submerged in the unconscious”, making up for the swamping
and had the time to reappear again’ (Mahatma of religion by science in the collective psyche, and
Letter 23B [to A. Sinnett]). thus obeying an historical law of the conservation
Post-Blavatskian macrohistories amount to vari- of psychic energy.
ous kinds of readaptions of, or reactions against, The ~ New Age macrohistorical ideas are too
her system (and against her free-floating selectivity many to summarize, but a number of significant
procedures, that owe much to Louis Jacolliot). developments are worth noting. Common is an
Inter alia > Annie Besant and > Alice Bailey show interest in cosmic catastrophes resulting in lost civ-
more interest than Blavatsky in the function of ilizations. Thus instead of the modern Theosophi-
nations. For Besant each nation represents a tem- cal vision of a descent of Root Races from ethereal
peramental aspect of the microcosm (India and realms, the focus is more on “secular-scientific”
Ireland possessing a resilience in the face of contin- possibilities: that Atlantis, before it was inundated,
ual conquest, for example); yet if this recalls was the basis for all Edenic myths (going back to
ancient astrological notions (Ptolemy, Tetrabib. Ignatius Donnelly); that a comet hit the earth to
2.3.), Besant is more interested in the pendulum produce the Flood and destroy former civilizations
swing between western and eastern conquests, and (Donnelly, W.C. Beaumont); that the earth shifts
in the Masters as “angel-kings” monitoring the sharply on its axis every 7000 years and destroys
nations’ roles. > Rudolf Steiner, who left Theoso- civilizations (H.A. Brown); that civilization was
phy (in 1913) and founded ~ Anthroposophy, only made possible by extra- (or intra-)terrestrial
sought to give back to Christ a centrality that the visitation (B. le Poer Trench, etc.); and so on.
Blavatskian system disallowed, while he retained We may note that the New Age phenomenon
and readapted the Root Race theory, and wrote of of Channeling can entail macrohistorical views.
an instructive “tension between East and West” Long-lost truths are believed available to be learnt,
through history. > René Guénon also reacted then, through the psychic memory of an > Edgar
against Theosophy, but turned Indian kalpa theory Cayce reaching back to Atlantis; or by adepts who
into a veritable dogma (though excluding reincar- can tap into etheric Masters, show how to recon-
nation). He had an extreme distaste for Western struct past lives, or prepare others for a returned
theories of process, especially evolutionism, yet, Golden Age that the present New Age portends.
like Steiner, he drew on cosmological ideas of a nec- Sometimes psychics’ contacts appear to be with
essary materialization even if it brought on a lam- chains of truth-bearers, reflective of the philoso-
entable Reign of Quantity (1945) from which the phia perennis and comparable frames (as with the
spiritual elite must escape. Polish psychic Stefan Ossowiecki’s apparitions of
The list of neo- and para-theosophic macrohis- Orpheus, Krishna, Buddha, Moses and Muham-
torical inventions could go on, in a diversifying mad). Already most of the theorists just mentioned
world of 2oth-century esotericisms and “occult” had trouble with Blavatskian views about the Mas-
systems. One thinks of > Aleister Crowley’s Ages ters, who were taken to be the true founders of the
of the Mother, Father and Child; of > William But- great religions and paths of wisdom “behind the
ler Yeats (1937) “Vision” of gyrations of history in scenes” (and who were only contactable by leaders
which will, mask, creative mind, and the body of of the Theosophical Society in its “Esoteric Sec-
fate predominate in turns; and of > P.D. Ouspen- tion”). Instead New Age thought favours the com-
sky’s thesis that Man’s Possible Evolution (1950) peting, more straightforward paradigm that has
had declined from a higher spiritual and knowing humanity’s long spiritual journey guided by its
state. The frequent evaluative displacement of the actual great spiritual leaders, or those “initiates”
centrality of Middle Eastern monotheisms derived into the supreme Truth who founded the known
from a combination of early Theosophy’s prefer- major religious traditions and appeared when
ence for Buddhism and the fact that the modern meant to on the stepping-stones of time. Such ideas
study of comparative religion seemed virtually already permeated Eastern Sufi schools and
born from Indology. Thus, in the words of R.W. Bahai’ism, before being expressed more systemati-
Hall, “the East” (basically India) was looked to as cally in the West by > Edouard Schuré (Les grands
“the Cradle of all Religion” and “the divine Mys- initiés [1889]). In general terms, Schuré’s picturing,
teries” (fairly waiting to become the location of spiced by schools of thought we may call “Tradi-
Jesus’ education and death in New Age imaging). tionalism” (sometimes “Perennialism”) stemming
The modern attraction of the East for the West was from Coomaraswamy, Guénon, etc., has come to
viewed by > Carl Gustav Jung as “a compensation be the most popular one in New Age discourse.

--- Page 139 ---
71S MACROHISTORY
7. CONCLUDING REMARKS Such intruders into prohibited places, of course,
Varied as they may be, all the afore-discussed were to be secularized in exoteric thought. For
thinkers from the last two centuries proffered large Friedrich Nietzsche Faustian consciousness sug-
specula historiae that appeared more and more dis- gested a longing for humanity to move Beyond
tinctively “esoteric” because their framers now Good and Evil (1886); and by his time Prometheus
often self-consciously identified with an/the eso- would symbolize that humanity itself, as against
teric tradition. In spurning the more commonly any divine gift-bearer, was quite capable of ‘un-
accepted ways of reading the past (whether natura- locking the sciences, the secret of all memory, . . .
listic, historicist, empiricist), they held the true and every occult art’ (cf. Aeschylus, Prom. Desm.
story to be “missed” by the majority. Their ap- 459-516).
proach here compares with the 2oth-century theo- Other sub-themes of interest concern the origin
logical distinction between a Heilsgeschichte (a and antiquity of particular esoteric preoccupa-
salvation history grasped by believers) and “clas- tions. This may be illustrated from the case of >
sic” Historie, and this is because it derives from tra- alchemy, traditionally traced to Hermes; and there
ditional ways of understanding long-term temporal is a tendency in alchemical writings to reinforce the
changes within spiritually-charged schemata. For mysterious aura of its past, with a given author’s
esotericists what may be termed “hierohistory” avoiding claims of innovation and deliberately
takes absolute precedence over the mundane attributing his writings to someone greater. Yet
details typical histories cover (A. Versluis). But again, there is the curious issue as to whether such
theirs is a distinctive preoccupation with “the inner a figure as Nostradamus (of some interest to eso-
mysteries” of change, not the mélée of outward tericists) could have visioned events of future world
relations and transient visibilities. They are often history from the 16th century on; and there are
connected with a search for a “third cosmos” par- even stranger questions surrounding the antiquity,
allel to microcosm and macrocosm, the final ubiquity and “return” of were-wolves and vam-
alchemical revelation (Al-Jabir [or Geber], Summ. pires, > witchcraft and sorcery.
perf.). Eventually, over the last hundred years, it
has become an issue for esotericists themselves Lit.: G.W. Trompf, “Macrohistory and Accultura-
what the true “whole” history of the esoteric quest tion”, Comparative Studies in Society and History 31:4
might be (Jung, E. Benz, P.A. Riffard, etc.). (1989), 621-648 @ J.D. Turner, Sethian Gnosticism
and the Platonic Tradition (Bibliothéque Copte de Nag To conclude, we may warn that there are many
Hammadi, Section “Etudes” 5), Louvain: Peeters, 2001
sub-themes in the world of esoteric macrohistory.
¢ Trompf, “From the Esoteric to the Exoteric and Back
The réle of special, apparently marginal “mystery- Again: Themes from Antiquity to Post-Modernity”,
figures” must first be noted. Consider the strange in: E. Crangle (ed.), Esotericism and the Control of
mythical figure of “Elias Artista”, who was in- Knowledge (Sydney Studies in Religion 5), Sydney:
voked as a hidden Master from Paracelsus’ time, University of Sydney, 2004, ch. r @ O. Frobe-Kapteyn
being a kind of saviour figure who could work (ed.), Mensch und Zeit (Eranos-Jahrbuch 30, [1951]),
Zurich: Rhein-Verlag, 1952 H. Corbin, Histoire de la
wonders in the domain of alchemy. Another curios-
philosophie islamique, Paris: Gallimard, 1964, part 2 @
ity is the Count > Saint-Germain, said to be the Trompf and A. Kasamine, “The Druze and the Quaker”,
same person unexpectedly reappearing at times of Prudentia, Spec. suppl. (1981), 187-205 @ M. Reeves,
important esoteric disclosures (especially during The Influence of Prophecy in the Later Middle Ages,
the 18th century). This case connects with ideas Oxford: Clarendon, 1969 @ Trompf, The Idea of
about the > reincarnation of the same spiritual Historical Recurrence in Western Thought, Berkeley:
being in religious “greats” (as with the Theosophic University of California Press, 1979, vol. 1 @ P.O.
Kristeller, Renaissance Concepts of Man, New York:
Masters, or the notion of “Melchizedek — Christ —
Harper & Row, 1972, ch. 5 # Charles B. Schmitt,
the man who was never born and will never die” “Perennial Philosophy: From Agostino Steuco to Leib-
(like the mystic Joel Goldsmith), but it has stronger niz”, Journal of the History of Ideas 27 (1966), 505-
associations with the undreading Dr. Faustus, who 532 @ D.P. Walker, The Ancient Theology: Studies in
was prepared to make a pact with the Devil to Christian Platonism from the Fifteenth to the Eight-
attain all-knowledge. In Goethe’s Faust (1808- eenth Century, London: Duckworth, 1972 @ EFA.
Yates, Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition
1832), which can be read as a “neo-gnostic” play,
(1964), Chicago: University of Chicago, r991 edn.
this mediaeval malapert becomes a hero: he is R.B. Barnes, Prophecy and Gnosis, Stanford: Stanford
redeemed rather than damned for wanting to UP, 1988 @ A. Versluis, Wisdom’s Children, State Uni-
acquire forbidden knowledge and experiences be- versity of New York Press, 1999, ch. 24 @ Trompf, “On
yond traditional learning and normative morality. Newtonian History”, in: S. Gaukroger (ed.), The Uses

--- Page 140 ---
MACROHISTORY 716
of Antiquity, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1991, 213-249 @ C.T. however. Although at first he strenuously insisted
Odhner, “The Successive Dispensations”, New Church that magic and religion were ‘separate in their
Life 32:6 (1912), 324-336 # A.O. Lovejoy, The Great nature and origin’ (1876, 1), in a large article on
Chain of Being: The Study of the History of an Idea,
magic in the Encyclopaedia Britannica (ignored by
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UP, 1964 @ E. Benz,
all Tylor specialists ever since) he completely re-
Les Sources mystiques de la philosophie romantique
allemande, Paris: Vrin, 1987 edn. @ R. Schwab, The versed his position and admitted that ‘a large pro-
Oriental Renaissance: Europe’s Recovery of India and portion’ of magic actually belonged ‘properly to
the East (trans. G. Patterson-Black and V. Reinking), the general theory of religion, inasmuch as their
New York: Columbia UP, 1984 @ A. Faivre and W.J. efficacy is ascribed to the intervention of spiritual
Hanegraaff (eds.), Western Esotericism and the Science beings’; other parts of magic, however, depend not
of Religion (Gnostica 2), Louvain: Peeters, 1998, esp.
on spiritual beings but ‘on imagined powers and
253-268 (A. McCalla on “Illuminism and French
correspondences in nature’ (Tylor 1883, 199; see Romantic Philosophies of History”), and 269-296
(Trompf, on “Macrohistory in Blavatsky, Steiner and discussion in Hanegraaff 1998). This about-face
Guénon”) @ W.J. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and was not adopted by J.G. Frazer, who, instead, sim-
Western Culture: Esotericism in the Mirror of Western plified Tylor’s approach into his famous evolution-
Thought, Leiden: Brill, 1996, part 3 # K.S. Old- ist triad: “magic” as the earliest and most primitive
meadow, Traditionalism: Religion in the Light of the
stage of development, followed by “religion” as a
Perennial Philosophy, Colombo: Sri Lankan Institute
higher level, which is finally superseded by the third for Traditional Studies, 2000 @ R. Ellis, Imagining
Atlantis, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1998 @ Faivre, and final stage of “science”. Magic in Frazer’s usage
“Elie Artiste, ou le messie des Philosophes de la actually means sympathetic magic (and therefore
Nature”, Aries 2:2 (2002), 119-1523 3:1 (2003), 25-54 excludes spiritual beings), understood along the
¢ J. Campbell (ed.), Spiritual Disciplines: Papers from lines of Tylor’s original position; it is based upon
the Eranos Yearbooks, London: Routledge & Kegan magicians’ assumption ‘that things act on each
Paul, 1960.
other at a distance through a secret sympathy’,
often explained in terms of ‘an invisible ether’
GARRY W. TROMPF
(Frazer 1951, 1, 54). Frazer, furthermore, famously
divided magic into “homeopathic (imitative, mime-
Magic I: Introduction tic)” and “contagious” magic: a distinction that
was probably taken straight from Tylor (see 1865,
When contemporary academics discuss “magic”, 119ff., 129ff.), who in turn could have found it in
in most cases the assumptions which guide their + Cornelius Agrippa’s De occulta philosophia (I,
understanding of it are variations on a few influen- 15-16), to which he frequently referred. This is a
tial theories. First, there is the “intellectualist” particularly clear example of how academic theo-
understanding of magic linked to the names of E.B. ries of magic may have unacknowledged roots in
Tylor and J.G. Frazer. Tylor, in his foundational magical currents in Western esotericism.
Primitive Culture of 1871, defined magic as based A second highly influential approach to magic
upon ‘the error of mistaking ideal analogy for real is the “functionalist” one, linked to the names of
connexion’ (Tylor 1771, I, 116). Tylor’s assump- Marcel Mauss and Emil Durkheim. Mauss in
tion was that primitive man, ‘having come to asso- 1902-1903 rejected Frazer’s reduction of magic to
ciate in thought those things which he found by sympathetic magic only, and concluded that in fact
experience to be connected in fact, proceeded erro- no tenable scholarly theory of magic as yet existed.
neously to invert this action, and to conclude that As an alternative to the “intellectualist” approach
association in thought must involve similar con- focused on ideas, he proposed a functionalist ap-
nexion in reality. He thus attempted to discover, to proach focused on ritual action, defining a “magi-
foretell, and to cause events by means of processes cal rite” as ‘any rite that is not part of an organized
which we can now see to have only an ideal cult: a rite that is private, secret, mysterious, and
significance’ (0.c., 104-105). It is clear from this ultimately tending towards one that is forbidden’
definition that, for Tylor, not religion (based on (1950, 16). Essentially the same approach was
animism, ‘the belief in spiritual beings’) but science adopted by Durkheim in his famous Formes élé-
should be the primary reference point for under- mentaires de la vie religieuse of 1912. On the basis
standing the nature of magic; and this is confirmed of circular reasoning of a surprisingly elementary
by the fact that, throughout his discussions, he used kind (see Hanegraaff 1999, 341-345) he assumed a
it as synonymous with “occult science”. Tylor’s ‘marked repugnance of religion for magic and the
description of magic as something unrelated to hostility of magic to religion in return’ and con-
animism/religion proved impossible to maintain, cluded that ‘there is something inherently anti-reli-

--- Page 141 ---
717 MAGIC I: INTRODUCTION
gious about the maneuvers of the magician’ (1912, frameworks does not logically imply, however, that
59-60). Against this background he defined reli- those frameworks can in turn be called magic; the
gious beliefs as shared by, and constitutive of, a fact that such implications have nevertheless been
social group, referred to as a ‘Church’; magicians, drawn has contributed considerably to confusion
in contrast, have merely an individual clientele: about the term “magic”.
‘There is no Church of magic’ (1912, 61; emphasis The theoretical approaches originating in Tylor,
in the original). In brief: religion is a social phe- Mauss and Lévy-Bruhl have been mixed and com-
nomenon, whereas magic is inherently non-social. bined in various more or less interesting ways; but
Close study of Mauss’s original discussion, from practically without exception this has been done
which Durkheim’s was derived, shows that the within a general context that is more basic than the
assumptions basic to his theory are in fact derived theories themselves, and the validity of which has
entirely from the traditional categories of Christian usually remained unexamined: the triad “magic -
heresiology: paranoid perceptions of magic as religion — science”, which may be linked mostly to
the practices of the unsocialized “other” are thus Frazer’s name but is in fact implied in some form by
adopted, quite uncritically, as the foundation for a almost all participants in the debate about magic.
purportedly academic study of what magic is Its point of departure is that “religion” (however
all about. defined) is clearly something different from modern
A third approach derives from Lucien Lévy- science and rationality. That relatively unproblem-
Bruhl’s theory of participation — remarkably, given atic distinction once having been made, it is fol-
the fact that this author in fact did not intend it as lowed by the observation that there exists a certain
a theory of magic. Lévy-Bruhl attempted over class of phenomena in human culture and history
several decades to come to grips with what he ori- which are likewise quite clearly different from mod-
ginally called the “pre-logical” thinking or mental- ern science and rationality, but which somehow do
ity supposedly prominent in “primitive” cultures: not quite seem to fit the model of “religion” either.
instead of a worldview based upon “instrumental This third category is then referred to by a variety
causality” (i.e. one that assumes the presence of of names, the very abundancy of which already
secondary causes or intervening mechanisms that demonstrates that it is in fact a waste-basket filled
mediate between causes and effects), typical of with left-overs: “magic”, “the occult” (resp. “oc-
modern culture, primitives seemed to have a world- cultism”, “occult science”), “superstition”, “mys-
view based upon “participation” (where causes ticism”, “esotericism”, “the irrational”, “primitive
and effects could be seen as associated to the point thought” (cf. “fetishism”, “idolatry”), and so on.
of identity and consubstantiality, without assum- Tacitly assuming such a triad, scholars of religion
ing the presence of intermediary links). Lévy-Bruhl have usually tended to be in favour of “science and
eventually came to recognize that participation rationality”, respectful at least towards “religion”,
constituted a primary and irreducible human con- and negative about “magic and the occult”. It is
stant, present in amy society, whether primitive or important to recognize that the very insistance on
modern. Later authors, most of whom had not distinguishing between the last two categories (reli-
carefully read Lévy-Bruhl himself but relied on cari- gion and magic) does not have its origin in any criti-
catures of his thinking as found in e.g. Bronislaw cal scholarly argumentation but means a simple
Malinowski (1948, 25), assumed that participation continuation of the historical usage long known to
and magic were equivalent; as a result, various the- western Christian culture. Religion meant “true
ories have come into existence that interpret magic (i.e., theologically correct) Christianity” while
as based upon a “different kind of rationality” (see magic meant demonic worship and pagan idolatry.
e.g. Robin Horton, and critical overview of the The discussion became more complicated since the
“rationality debate” in Luhrmann 1989, 345-356). 12th/13th century, with the emergence of the idea
There is a certain legitimacy to this, since theo- of magia naturalis: magic understood as “occult
retical frameworks alternative to “instrumental science” based on the hidden (i.e. occult) forces of
causality” (e.g. non-causal > correspondences on nature, and therefore easier to legitimate theologi-
the one hand, and “occult causality” [> occult/ cally. As a result of this double heritage, with the
occultism] on the other) are in fact basic to much emergence of modern science since the 17th cen-
that has been understood as “magic”, at least in tury magia naturalis found itself open to attack
Western culture since antiquity and up to the 18th from all sides: the protestant Reformation had
century. Arguably such frameworks can, further- given a revived sense of urgency to anti-magical
more, be understood in terms of “participation”. arguments, many theological critics failed to be
The fact that much magic is based upon such convinced about natural magic being non-demonic

--- Page 142 ---
MAGIC I: INTRODUCTION 718
and continued to accuse practioners and theoreti- different from “religion” pure and simple. A more
cians of the occult sciences of trafficing with the consistent and historically more fruitful approach
devil, and they were now joined by modern scien- would be to start by recognizing the religious plu-
tists and philosophers who acccused them of ralism that has in fact always characterized West-
obscurantism and irrationality. This last line of ern culture, and analyze magic as a largely
attack was taken over by the Enlightenment tradi- polemical concept that has been used by various
tion, adopted by Tylor, and continued by scholars religious interest groups either to describe their
throughout much of the 2oth century. own religious beliefs and practices or — more fre-
Most academic theories of magic since Tylor quently — to discredit those of others. If any etic
have continued to make a sharp distinction be- concept of magic is still considered necessary at all,
tween religion and magic, in spite of the fact that it might be used as the common denominator of ‘a
this distinction properly belongs to the domain of discursive field, in which different Occidentalist
theological polemics internal to Christianity, and definitions of deluded or illusory beliefs were
cannot claim any scholarly foundation. The lack of accompanied by doubts about the extent to which
such a foundation has not sufficiently bothered they were deluded, illusory, backward, or irra-
scholars of religion. After a purely theological tional’ (Pels 2003, 16).
notion had come to be uncritically adopted, it even-
tually ended up assuming the role of an unexam- Lit.: Emile Durkheim, Les formes élémentaires de la vie
religieuse (1912), Paris: Quadrige/PUF, 1960, 3rd ed.
ined guiding intuition in scholarly discussions: an
1994 @ J.G. Frazer, The Golden Bough (1900), Lon-
assumption too basic even to be perceived, and too
don: MacMillan & Co, 1951 @ Ariel Glucklich, The
self-evident to be in need of arguments. End of Magic, New York/Oxford: Oxford University
Political and social factors have played a signi- Press, 1997 # Wouter J. Hanegraaff, “The Emergence
ficant role in this process as well, for the perception of the Academic Science of Magic: The Occult Philos-
of “magic” and “the occult” as something sharply ophy in Tylor and Frazer”, in: Arie L. Molendijk &
different from religion came to play an important Peter Pels (eds.), Religion in the Making: The Emer-
gence ofthe Sciences of Religion, Leiden, Boston, Koln:
role in the colonial enterprise. To the extent that the
E.J. Brill 1998, 253-275 # idem, “Defining Religion in
vestiges of true “religion” were encountered among Spite of History”, in: Jan G. Platvoet & Arie L.
primitive peoples in the form of “animism”, these Molendijk (eds.), The Pragmatics of Defining Religion:
could be redeemed and purified by being channeled Contexts, Concepts and Contests, Leiden, Boston,
towards Christianity. For the “magic” of the prim- Koln: E.J. Brill, 1999, 337-378 @ idem, “How Magic
itives, however (branded by Tylor [1871, I, 112- Survived the Disenchantment of the World”, Religion
113] asa ‘contemptible superstition’ and as ‘one of 33:4 (2003), 357-380 @ Robin Horton, Patterns of
Thought in Africa and the West: Essays on Magic, Reli-
the most pernicious delusions that ever vexed
gion and Science, Cambrige: Cambridge University
mankind’), such redemption was neither wished- Press, 1993 @ T.M. Luhrmann, Persuasions of the
for nor needed: it had to be rooted out by education Witch’s Craft: Ritual Magic in Contemporary Eng-
or use of force. In its — ultimately fruitless — land, Cambridge Ma.: Harvard University Press, 1989
attempts to do so, the colonialist missionary ¢ Bronislaw Malinowski, Magic, Science and Religion
enterprise essentially repeated the early Christian and Other Essays (1948), Prospect Heights, Ill.: Wave-
land Press, 1992 # Marcel Mauss, “Esquisse d’unemissionary attempt to free Europe from pagan
théorie générale de la magie” (orig. 1902/1903), in:
superstition. In sum: scholarly theory about magic
Sociologie et anthropologie, Paris: Quadrige/PUF
served as theoretical justification for converting 1950, 6th ed. 1995 @ Peter Pels, “Introduction: Magic
non-European peoples from primitive magic to and Modernity”, in: Birgit Meyer & Peter Pels (eds.),
Christianity and an Enlightened worldview; but Magic and Modernity: Interfaces of Revelation and
this theory itself was merely a reformulation of Concealment, Stanford: Stanford University Press,
Christian-theological polemics against paganism. 2003, I-38 @ Randall Styers, Making Magic: Religion,
In the post-colonial period Western scholars have Magic, and Science in the Modern World, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2004 @ Stanley Jeyaraja Tam-
become more sensitive about issues of ethnocen- biah, Magic, Science, Religion, and the Scope ofRatio-
trism and Eurocentric arrogance, but the logical nality, Cambridge etc.: Cambridge University Press,
step of discarding the category of “magic” has not 1990 Edward Burnett Tylor, Researches into the
been taken. Many authors opt for half-way solu- Early History of Mankind and the Development of
tions such as speaking about “magic” while admit- Civilization, London: John Murray, 1870 @ idem,
ting that is a form of “religion”, but without Primitive Culture: Researches into the Development of
Mythology, Philosophy, Religion, Language, Art, and
explaining in what then relies its specificity. Others
Custom, repr. London: John Murray, 1871 ¢@ idem,
use adjectives such as “magico-religious”, but again “Ordeals and Oaths”, MacMillan’s Magazine 34
without specifying in what respect this category is (1876), 1-1r @ idem, “Magic”, in: Encyclopaedia

--- Page 143 ---
719 MAGIC II: ANTIQUITY
Britannica, 9th ed., vol. 15, 199-206 H.S. Versnel, view is as old as the perception of “magic” as some-
“Some Reflections on the Relationship Magic-Reli- thing different from other cultic activities; both go
gion”, Numen 38:2 (1991), 177-197. back to the late 6th century B.C. The alternative
view held by Pindar in the fourth Pythian Ode
WOUTER J. HANEGRAAFF
(a. 462 B.C.) was already dated at that time and
never became popular: according to his narration,
Magic II: Antiquity
Aphrodite taught erotic magic to Jason in order to
seduce Medea. In this mythical account, then, A. History
(erotic) magic is understood as a cultural technique1. TERMINOLOGY 2. ANCIENT THEORIES
that can be taught, like agriculture or writing.3. RITUALS 4. MAGIC AND PHILOSOPHY
The dominant view in antiquity, however, mar-
ginalizes magic much stronger by removing its B. LITERATURE
invention in place and time. It is uniformly said to 1. INTRODUCTION 2. EVIDENCE FOR
come from the Persian sage > Zoroaster whomMAGICAL BOOKs 3. THE PAPYRI GRAECAE
most ancient authors date well before the TrojanMAGICAE 4. HELLENISTIC ANTECEDENTS
War. According to Pliny (Natural History, bk. 30),
A. History who reports the general opinion but challenges an
early date, magic developed out of healing, was
1. TERMINOLOGY very early influenced by > astrology, and was in
The modern term “magic” and its cognates Persia such a respectable art that Pythagoras,
derive, through Latin intermediates (magia), from Empedocles, Democritus and Plato went to Persia
the Greek magiké, “the art of the magoi”, the Per- to be taught in it. This reflects an alternative evalu-
sian priests (magus in ancient Persian). The Greeks ation of barbarian wisdom that makes non-Greeks
used this word to designate a ritual practitioner into retainers of supreme knowledge (Momigliano
occupied with private rites whose legitimacy was 1975). From early on, it was debated whether the
contested and often, at least in later times, margin- Persian magoi were philosophers or wizards (in
alised and forbidden. The exact nature of these Persian itself, magus could have a negative conno-
rites varies and comprises mystery cults (Heracli- tation as well). The positive (“ethnographical”)
tus, frg. 14 DK), binding spells (defixiones) and cer- reading of the term (from Herodot onwards, with
tain forms of divination [> Divinatory Arts]; what Plato, Alcibiades Maior 122b, as the most influen-
mattered more than a specific content was the tial passage and a lost Pseudo-Aristotelian dialogue
opposition to legitimate and overt religious prac- as its most thorough exposition) competed with the
tice — magic, that is, was always seen as nocuous. negative (“Greek”) understanding (Bidez and
Other terms for the practitioners were the Cumont 1938). Another early magical culture was
Greek goes (orig. the “wailer”, a specialist for the perceived in Judaism, with > Moses as its inventor;
communication with the dead), whence goeteia, this reflects the high esteem Jewish magic enjoyed
“sorcery” (in later texts with a more negative con- in Hellenistic and Imperial times. Egypt, on the
notation than mageia), and, as a specialist, phar- other hand, was rarely regarded as the origin of
makeutria, a “woman using herbs and drugs” (like magic, despite its indigenous tradition that made
Medea). Latin equivalents are saga, “witch”, vene- Isis into, among other things, a powerful magician
ficus, “poisener” and, in later texts, maleficus, and that had in the goddess Hekate a divine expo-
“evildoer”; a specialist for undoing binding-spells nent of ritual power. Homer makes it the homeland
was, in sth century Athens, an analutes, “un- of ‘potions, some helpful when mixed, but most
binder”. The Near-Eastern association of sorcery harmful’ (Odyssey 4, 228); later, it is important
expressed in the term mdgos/magus appears also in only in the Graeco-Roman texts that directly fed on
the designation of “magicians” as Chaldaioi/Chal- the Egyptian tradition, like the work of the Egypt-
daei (lit. an inhabitant of Chaldaea, a region in ian writing in Greek Bolus of Mendes (first half of
southern Mesopotamia) that appears from Hel- the 2nd century B.C.), the Hermetic tradition, espe-
lenistic times onwards and might have its root in cially the Asclepius (2nd century A.D.), or the so-
the actual presence of Near Eastern specialists in called magical papyri (3rd-5th century A.D., with
the Graeco-Roman west. earlier antecedents).
Other ancient theories concerned not the origin
2. ANCIENT THEORIES of magic but the way it was functioning. The gen-
Thus, the general Greek and Roman assumption eral view, most succinctly presented by Apuleius
was that magic originated with the Persians. This (Apologia 22) was that the magician had superhuman

--- Page 144 ---
MAGIC II: ANTIQUITY 720
powers granted to him because he could directly lead statuettes are preserved, while Egyptian graves
talk to the gods (‘communio loquendi cum dis’). also preserved some wax statuettes; the use of wax
This puts an emphasis on the power of spells and for statuettes and of waxen or wooden tablets or of
prayers that goes well beyond the sphere of magic papyrus for the texts is attested in literature. The
(Baeumer 1984), but is confirmed by the actual rit- texts themselves were often pierced with a nail, and
uals and their aim to make the ritual word as ‘nailing down’ (katapassaleo) is another term for
durable as possible (see below). This is less rooted the ritual activity, used in Attic Greek. If the rituals
in a belief in an inherent power of the ritual word described in the much later Graeco-Egyptian
than in the assumption that the magician’s direct papyri can be used as a guide for these earlier ritu-
access to a supreme divinity grants him power over als (and the rites seem to show some uniformity
the lesser demons he is using for his purpose. This and stability), one has to assume that the spells
demonological understanding of magic is the gen- written on the lead tablets were recited at the time
eral view of later antiquity as found e.g. both in the they were written and in the place where the tablets
Magical Papyri and the actual ritual spells, and it is, then were hidden. The written texts thus preserved
in a semiotic theory of speech, the basis for > the powerful ritual word, and the spell was broken
Augustine’s refusal of magic: since the meaning of only when the tablet was found and destroyed,
words is arbitrary and results from an agreement as at least one later text and the papyri confirm.
between the speaking parties, magic loses its power The existence of a professional “unbinder”, an
when the Christians cancel this agreement between analutes, in 4th-century Athens, however, points to
themselves and the demons and thus make lan- other ritual means of undoing the spell that elude
guage unintelligible to them (De doctrina Chris- our knowledge, while an oracle from Apollo in
tiana 2, 36-38 [Markus 1994]). Well before these Klaros (about 166 AD) prescribes a fire ritual to
later theories, Plato formulated in his Laws a social melt down the waxen magical images that caused a
and psychological theory of magic that dispensed plague (Zeitschrift fiir Papyrologie und Epigraphik
with any metaphysical entities. Magic, seen only in 92,1992, 276-78).
the widespread reality of binding spells with the Binding spells were used in situations of crisis
help of magical dolls, is a special instance of poi- created by contest and rivalry; they served to defuse
soning (pharmakeia), performed both by special- an uncertain and therefore frightening situation.
ists and by laymen; its use for personal aims results They might concern the conquest of an erotic part-
from the moral decay of society, and its success lies ner (mostly by males, and usually as a spouse rather
in the fear it creates (Plato, Laws 11,932f.). Ideally, than for an amorous adventure), victory in court or
these fears should be allayed by persuasion, but in in an athletic contest, or success over a rival busi-
the actual state of society, severe punishment of its nessman or craftsman. Binding spells against one’s
use was the only possible remedy. adversaries in court were very prominent in 5th
and 4th century Athens, but not confined to this
3. RITUALS place and time; an interesting case concerns a law-
The main use magic ritual was put to in Graeco- suit brought against a priest of Sarapis in early
Roman society was for binding spells (defixiones). Hellenistic Delos (Engelmann 1975). During the
Text of such spells, written on thin sheets of lead, imperial epoch, athletic spells usually concerned
date back to the later 6th century B.C. (Sicily, chariot races where the social stakes were very high
Southern Italy); in the later sth century, they begin (see Jerome, Life of Hilarion 11). While earlier
to be more numerous in mainland Greece as well, binding spells ordinarily aimed at temporally inca-
especially Athens. The early texts typically invoke pacitating an adversary (which did not exclude
divinities of the underworld (Persephone, Hermes accidental death e.g. through a badly administered
Chthonios) and ‘dedicate’ (anatithémi, Lat. devo- love potion), the spells from the imperial epoch often
veo) or bind down (katadeo) to them one or several threaten the death of their victims. Therefore, the
individuals; the texts were usually rolled or folded Sullan Lex Cornelia de sicariis et veneficis (82 B.C.)
together and deposited in graves or wells. From the was extended to cover magical attacks as well.
late 5th century onwards, these lead texts could be In early Rome, another area of magical action
accompanied by a statuette of a person whose arms was thought to be the transfer of harvests and crops
were tied to the back (in an iconography that goes from one field unto another with the means of
back to Egyptian rituals to keep away enemies spells (perlicere or incantare messes). The XII
from the borders [Ritner 1993]). These statuettes tablets provide capital punishment for this form of
represented the victims of the spell and were often illegitimate gain, and historians preserve one
inscribed with their names. Outside Egypt, only instance of a trial under this rubric, held in the early

--- Page 145 ---
2 MAGIC II: ANTIQUITY
2nd century B.C. (Pliny, Natural History 18, 41- ception the borderline between philosopher, charis-
43); later, it became a purely literary motif (Virgil, matic miracle worker and sorcerer began to break
Bucolics 8, 99). down. In about 158 CE, in his defense against
During the imperial epoch, private forms of magic, the Platonic philosopher Apuleius carefully
divinations began to become another field whose tried to establish such a distinction (Apuleius,
rituals were thought of as magical (Graf 1996). The Apology). Some six decennia later, Philostratus
Graeco-Egyptian papyri contain many recipes that gives an account of the rst century Neo-Pytha-
prescribe rites for the sending of dreams (a private gorean Apollonius of Tyana that deals also with the
form of divination), for screening (lecanomancy) accusation of magic brought forward against him
and, less often, for necromancy. Several laws by the by Domitian (Philostratus, Life of Apollonius of
Christian emperors of the 4th century ban divina- Tyana). Such accusations persisted well into a
tion together with other magical practices (esp. Christianized empire (trial and execution of Boe-
Codex Theodosianus 9,16,3-7. 9), and already thius in 524 A.D., inter alia because of magic).
Apuleius, in his defense against the accusation The corollary of this perception is the “theolo-
of magic, mentioned ecstatic divination induced gical turn” of late antique philosophy, starting
by magical means (Apuleius, Apologia 42). This with Middle Platonism. Already before that, Neo-
extension of the field of what ancient cultures Pythagoreanism came close: in 28 B.C., Augustus
viewed as magic is less due to the rise of divination expelled the Neo-Pythagorean philosopher and
outside the official divinatory sanctuaries (there magician Anaxilaus of Larissa (Jerome, Chronicle).
was always informal divination as well, although Taking their clue from Plato’s demonology (esp. in
we lack data to its extent in archaic and classical the Phaedrus), Platonist philosophers constructed
times) than to the monopoly of the emperor and, in a cosmology in which a more and more complex
the Christian 4th century, the bishops on access to hierarchy of superhuman beings was active; at the
knowledge about the future (Fégen 1993). same time, the demonological interpretation of
The status of ritual healing (a sphere that mod- magic became all-pervasive. Plotinus, who clearly
ern definitions of magic often subsume under this marked the distance between philosophy and
category) in Greek and Roman culture is less easily magic (Enneads IV, 43), was believed to be able to
determined. Homer is aware of the stanching of ward of magical attacks by an adversary with the
blood with the help of spells (Odyssee 19,457), but help of his superior guardian divinity (Porphyry,
avoids any term that could connect it with magic. Life of Plotinus 10). Later, Maximus of Ephesus,
The professional doctor, however, who wrote, at the teacher of the emperor Julian, protected a pupil
about 400 B.C., the Hippocratic treatise On the against an erotic binding spell (Eunapius, Life of
Sacred Disease, ascribes the ritual healing of the Sophists 6.9), and Proclus, the last head of the
epilepsy to quacks, cathartic priests and sorcerers, Athenian Academy, was believed to have per-
turning magic polemically into the opposite of formed weather magic (as had already, about a mil-
medical science (Lloyd 1979); a similar dichotomy lenium earlier, Empocles of Acragas) with the help
appears, much later, in Apuleius’ treatment of of a traditional magical instrument, the iynx (Mar-
epilepsy (Apology 48f.). Varro and Pliny report inus, Life of Proclus 28).
cures with, among other things, the help of spells The decisive step towards blending magical and
but refrain from labeling them magical, while the philosophical traditions was made by the creation
Graeco-Roman papyri contain several recipes for of theurgy, as expressed in the Chaldaen Oracles;
the treatment of otherwise untreatable ailings — its creators were Julian father (“the Chaldaean”)
headache, toothache, and similar minor problems. and son (“the theurgist”) in the later 2nd century
Only Christian teaching was confronted with the A.D. (Johnston 1997). Literally ‘working the divine’,
problem that in some cases healing was a miracle theurgy was a ritual technique that performed the
due to divine intervention while other cures, per- ascent towards the supreme god as the source of
formed by some marginal old woman, were viewed pure knowledge (mous). Since the ecstatic ascent
as magic and sorcery. was sought for by the philosophers (Plotinus was
said to have several such experiences), it could have
4. MAGIC AND PHILOSOPHY purely cognitive aims, but it also could serve div-
While magic, before the imperial epoch, was a inatory purposes (an ascent ritual as a means for
straightforward albeit mostly illegitimate type of divination is described in PGM IV, the so-called
ritual behaviour, it gained a new dimension in “Mithras Liturgy”). Plotinus’ pupil Iamblichus
learned speculation and popular imagination of the defended theurgy as a philosophical technique
imperial period. On the one hand, in popular per- against the accusations of his fellow pupil Porphyry

--- Page 146 ---
MAGIC II: ANTIQUITY ee
(On the Mysteries of Egypt, directed against Por- commands’ that were said to go back in part to
phyry’s Letter to Anebo) and projected it well into Zoroaster or Ostanes, Persian founders of magic
the far past of Egypt, and theurgical techniques (Zacharias, Vita Severi, 61). The authorities had
were used and defended as late as Pro- the books burned. The burning of secret books that
clus (Theologia Platonica 1.29). Together with the were viewed as deviant or dangerous has a long his-
praise of Egyptian “magic” in the Hermetic Ascle- tory in Roman culture that precedes the Christian
pius, this prepared the ground for Renaissance magic. emperors. On his accession as pontifex maximus in
13 B.C., Augustus had burnt about 2000 oracular
B. LITERATURE books that rivalled the Sibylline books (Suetonius,
Life of Augustus, 31, 1), and already in 181 B.C.,
1. INTRODUCTION the Senate ordered the burning of (Pythagorean)
With the exception of the so-called “Greek Mag- books by Numa that were found in a grave (Livy,
ical Papyri” from Roman Egypt and texts related to 40, 29) (Speyer 1980).
them that all follow an Egyptian tradition of ritual There is no evidence for magical books before
texts, albeit partly in Greek form, Greek and imperial times. Binding spells written on lead
Roman society had no collections of texts that were tablets, however, go back to the late 6th century
used in magical rites. Theurgical, astrological and B.C. in Sicily and Southern Italy, to the later sth
Hermetic texts form separate, although related tra- century B.C. in Athens and other parts of the Greek
ditions with some overlaps. This scarcity of texts mainland. These texts are short (often simple lists
distinguishes these societies from those of the Near of names) and in prose, with a stereotypical vocab-
East and Egypt where collections of ritual instruc- ulary that is specific to the region they come from.
tions used in apotropaic rites of magic and compa- Nothing necessitates the assumption that these
rable contexts played an important role, but it goes texts derive from ritual books (as in the case of
together with the lack of written ritual manuals in the much more elaborate and more uniform hexa-
Greek and in most parts of Roman culture — with metrical texts on the so-called “Orphic” tablets).
the exception of the so-called Etrusca disciplina, a Although they were, in part at least, executed by
Latin version of the corpus of Etruscan religious specialists of whose existence Plato knows (Repub-
writing on esp. divinatory and cathartic ritual that lic 364 bd), an oral transmission is more likely, as
was connected with the haruspices (libri rituales, it is certain for much older texts, e.g. the incan-
haruspicini, fulgurales). There were, however, tation for stanching blood mentioned in Odyssey
numerous pseudepigraphical collections of hexa- 19,457:
metrical texts used in mystery cults and divination
(Orphic poetry, oracles of Bakis and of the Sibyls). 3. THE PAPYRI GRAECAE MAGICAE
Among these books, the Chaldaean Oracles (Orac- The only extant magical books are part of the
ula Chaldaica) that contained the essence of collection of the Papyri Graecae Magicae (Greek
theurgy can be regarded as belonging to magical lit- Magical Papyri, PGM). The name and the collec-
erature as well. tion are modern; it was edited by Karl Preisendanz
(with the help of colleagues) after the First World
2. EVIDENCE FOR MAGICAL BooKs War (vol.1: 1928; vol. 2: 1931; vol. 3, with the
The existence of magical books is attested indexes, fell victim to the Second War). The collec-
through the entire imperial epoch and in many tion contains, besides the magical books proper
places, especially in the Greek East. When preach- (i.e. collections of instructions for magical rituals),
ing in Ephesus, Paul moved those ‘who formerly magical formularies (i.e. the instruction for one
practised magic’ (esp. exorcism) to burn a consid- specific rite written on a small scroll or piece of
erable number of their books (Acts 19, 19). Around papyrus), and actual applied magical texts written
400 A.D., the compilator of the Sentences of Paul on papyrus or lead [> Amulets]. Its name is insofar
(Pauli Sententiae), a collection of commentaries on a misnomer as some of the books contain substan-
earlier laws, states that ‘nobody shall possess tial parts written in Egyptian (in demotic script),
books about the magical craft (libros magicae sometimes with glosses in Old Coptic (Brashear
artis)’, lest he risk their public burning, the 1995). Since the publication, new texts have been
confiscation of his fortune and exile or death (5, 23, found; some of them have been added in the second
17). When, in about 490 A.D., Egyptian students at edition (1973/74) and the English translation
the law school of Beirut dabbled in magic, one of (1986) of PGM, others are collected, with am-
them at least had secret books with ‘drawings of ple commentaries, in the Supplementum Magicum
perverse demons, barbaric names and harmful . . . (2 vols., 1990 and 1992).

--- Page 147 ---
723 MAGIC II: ANTIQUITY
The books in question are large collections of rit- for single rites like the ones preserved in the for-
ual prescriptions, written between the third and the mularies, assembled over time according to the
5th century A.D. The PGM edits thirteen books of taste of the single collector. Thus, they shed an
different length, and about 20 shorter formularies important light on the existence and form of earlier
(mostly for one or very few single rites) have been magical literature. Once, the source is a ‘holy book’
published since then. Six of the books come from (PGM Ill, 424) or a book found in Aphrodite’s
the same cache in Egyptian Thebes (the so-called sanctuary in Aphroditopolis (PGM VII, 852).
Anastasi cache, after the Alexandrian merchant Some texts have the form of letters (e.g. from a
who bought them in 1828) that contained also certain Nephotes = Nefer-hotep to king Psammeti-
two alchemical papyri. They represent a library chos, with instructions for ‘procuring a holy
‘designed for study rather than for the practical power’ and bowl divination, PGM IV, 154-285; or
use’ (Fowden 1986) and demonstrate the close from ‘Jeu the Hieroglyphist’ to gain power over the
relationship between magic, hermetic, and alchem- demons, PGM V, 96-171). In a few cases, more
ical texts. substantial older texts that have been incorporated
The books as well as the short formularies all into the extant collection are discernible. The most
contain instructions for the performance of rituals, important are:
with detailed indications of the necessary ingredi- — the detailed description of a theurgic ascension
ents for the rite and its place and time, and with rite, the so-called “Mithras Liturgy” (PGM IV,
often long accompanying spells (Jogos) and hymns. 475-829, a 4th century book from the Anastasi
In the Greek texts, these spoken parts contain also cache, now in Paris, Bibliothéque Nationale);
non-Greek parts — either series of vowels and con- - an elaborate erotic binding spell, the “Sword of
sonants or seemingly abstruse words. These latter Dardanos” (PGM IV, 1716-1870; “sword” refers
are the “barbarian names” that are prominent in to a specific type of formula, as in the “Sword of
descriptions of magical rites: in the performer’s Moses”);
opinion, they represent the true name of a divinity — three versions of a necromantic ritual ascribed to
or demon. Often, they sound vaguely Egyptian or one Pitys the Thessalian (PGM IV, 1918-2005;
Hebrew, and scholars have tried to analyze them 2006-2125;21 40-2144);
with the help of these languages. The results are not — three version of the Eighth Book of Moses, also
always convincing, and it often seems that the called Monas, with references to a commentary on
authors of the texts themselves aimed at an Egypt- it, the Key (PGM XIII, 1-734, another 4th-century
ian or Hebrew name, but, given their lack of lin- book from the Anastasi cache, now in the Rijksmu-
guistic knowledge, were content with a vague seum van Oudheden, Leiden).
resemblance. Underlying is the theory that Egypt-
ian (and Assyrian) were the oldest human lan- 4. HELLENISTIC ANTECEDENTS
guages and as such very close to the language of the These and other texts preserved in the collections
gods, which made the use of Assyrian and Egyptian (e.g. the Diadem of Moses, PGM VI, 619, a 2nd or
most welcome and effectful to them (Iamblichus, 3rd century book in the British Museum) shed
Mysteries, 15). This also explains the occurrence of some light on the vast lost production of ritual
the name of the Sumerian goddess of the under- instruction in Graeco-Roman Egypt that followed
world, Ereshkigal, in some texts. The texts are all earlier, indigenous examples and might thus go
written in a general prescriptive style; personal back to Hellenistic times (Smith 1984). The main
names of victims that would have to be written and author whom Greek and Roman sources connect
spoken during the actual performance are replaced with magical literature is the Egyptian Bolus of
by a general reference to ‘NN son/daughter of NN’. Mendes (2nd century B.C.). His Cheiromecta,
The single papyrus books are not uniform as to written under the name of the pre-Socratic philoso-
their content. Most of them contain a loosely pher Democritus, is the first compilation of magical
arranged sequence of single, self-contained instruc- material of which we hear (Dickie 1999). Demo-
tions for a single specific ritual: to acquire a critus, like Pythagoras and Plato, was thought to
demonic assistant (indispensable for becoming a have learned secret Egyptian wisdom when travel-
magician), to obtain divine revelation awake or in ling in the East, and he is connected with a variety
a dream, to perform a binding spell, or to make an of magical rituals (see the medico-astrological text
amulet. Only one papyrus (no. VII, London, British in PGM XII 351-64, the dream ritual ibid. VII 79 5-
Museum) contains also a significant number of 845, or the entertaining tricks ibid. VII 168-85).
instructions for healing rituals for minor ailments. The book is lost, and its character and influence is
The books are thus loose collections of instructions debated, but one has to assume considerably more

--- Page 148 ---
MAGIC II: ANTIQUITY 724
coherence and a less loose and haphazard form (Engl. Magic in the Ancient World, Cambridge, Mass.:
than the one of the extant magical books. A some- Harvard University Press, 1997) @ S.J. Johnston, “Ris-
ing to the Occasion: Theurgic Ascent in Its Cultural
what later author is Anaxilaus of Larisa, magician
Milieu”, in: P. Schafer and H.G. Kippenberg (eds.),
and Pythagorean who was expelled by Augustus in
Envisioning Magic: A Princeton Seminar and Sympo-
28 BC (Jerome, Chronicle). He is known as the sium, Leiden: Brill, 1997, 165-194 # M.W. Dickie,
author of Paignia, magical tricks for entertainment “The Learned Magician and the Collection and Trans-
rather than “serious” magic, although this dicho- mission of Magical Lore”, in: D. Jordan, H. Mont-
tomy is not necessarily relevant for an imperial gomery & E. Thomassen (eds.), The World of Ancient
culture where tricks and divination were both per- Magic: Papers from the First International Samson
Eitrem Seminar at the Norwegian Institute at Athens
formed by market place magicians, and where the
4-8 May 1997, Papers from the Norwegian Institute at
magical books of the PGM contain some such
Athens 4, Bergen: The Norwegian Institute at Athens,
tricks as well. 1999, 163-94 # FE. Graf, “Magic and Divination”,
idem, 283-298 @ M. Dickie, Magic and Magicians in
Binding spells: A. Audollent, Defixionum tabellae, the Greaco-Roman World, London: Routledge, 2oor
Paris: Albert Fontemoing, 1904 @ J.G. Gager (ed.), @ W. Speyer, Biichervernichtung und Zensur des Geistes
Curse Tablets and Binding Spells from the Ancient bei Heiden, Juden und Christen, Stuttgart: Steiner,
World, New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980 W.M. Brashear, “The Greek Magical Papyri:
1992 Chaldaean Oracles: Oracula Chaldaica (E. des An Introduction and Survey. Annotated Bibliography
Places, ed.), Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1971 @ R.D. (1928-1994)”, in: Aufstieg und Niedergang der Romi-
Majercik (ed.), The Chaldaen Oracles, Leiden: Brill, schen Welt, 2:18:5, Berlin & New York: De Gruyter
1989 @ Papyri: K. Preisendanz (ed.), Papyri Graecae 1995, 3380-3684 @ Garth Fowden, The Egyptian Her-
Magicae, Leipzig: Teubner, 1928, 1931 (2nd ed. by mes: A Historical Approach to the Late Pagan Mind,
A. Henrichs, Stuttgart: Teubner 1973-1974) @ H.-D. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986 ¢@
Betz (ed.), The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation, M. Smith, “The Eighth Book of Moses and How It
Including the Demotic Spells, Chicago: The University Grew (P.Leid. J 395)”, in: Atti del XVII Congresso
of Chicago Press, 1986 @ R. Daniels & E Maltomini Internazionale di Papirologia, Napels: Centro Inter-
(eds.), Supplementum Magicum, Opladen: West- nazionale per lo Studio dei Papiri Ercolanesi, 1984,
deutscher Verlag, 1990, 1992. vol. 2, 683-693.
Lit.: J. Bidez & E. Cumont, Les mages hellénisés: Zoro- FRITZ GRAF
astre, Ostanés et Hystaspe d’apres la tradition grecque,
Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1938 # H. Lewy, Chaldaean
Oracles and Theurgy, 2nd ed., Paris: Etudes Augus- Magic III: Middle Ages
tiniennes, 1978 (orig. 1956) # H. Engelmann, The
Delian Aretalogy of Sarapis, Leiden: Brill, 1975 ¢
A. HisTORY A. Momigliano, Alien Wisdom: The Limits of Hell-
enization, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1. EARLY MEDIEVAL CONSTRUCTIONS OF
1975 #G.E.R. Lloyd, Magic, Reason, and Experience: Maaic 2. LATE MEDIEVAL CONSTRUCTIONS
Studies in the Origin and Development of Greek Sci- OF Macic: NATURAL PHILOSOPHY 3. MORE
ence, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979 # LATE MEDIEVAL CONSTRUCTIONS: RITUAL
A. Baeumer, “Die Macht des Wortes in Religion und
MaGIc
Magie (Plinius, Naturalis Historia 28, 4-29)”, Hermes
119 (1984), 84-99 @ S.I. Johnston, Hekate Soteira: A
Study of Hekate’s Roles in the Chaldaean Oracles and B. LITERATURE
Related Literature, Atlanta, Georgia: Scholars Press, 1. GENERAL DIVISIONS 2. CHANGES OVER
1990 @ Chr. A. Faraone & D. Obbink (eds.), Magika TIME 3. TRANSMISSION AND SURVIVAL
Hiera: Ancient Greek Magic and Religion, New York, 4. GENRES (A. DIVINATION B. EXPERIMENTS,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991 Chr. Daxel- BOOKS OF SECRETS, AND RECIPES
miller, Zauberpraktiken: Eine Ideengeschichte der
c. CHARMS D. ASTROLOGICAL OR ASTRAL
Magie, Zurich: Artemis, 1992 @ M. Th. Fogen, Die
Macic £. RITUAL MAGIc) Enteignung der Wahrsager: Studien zum kaiserlichen
Wissensmonopol in der Spdatantike, Frankfurt: Suhr-
kamp, 1993 @ R.K. Ritner, The Mechanics of Ancient Ao TELUS 2 O hy
Egyptian Magical Practice, Chicago: Chicago Univer- While “magic” was used as a term of oppro-
sity Press, 1993 @ R.A. Markus, “Augustine on Magic: brium from antiquity, by the later middle ages it
A Neglected Semiotic Theory”, Revue des Etudes
begins to be possible for intellectuals to argue in a
Augustiniennes 40 (1994), 375-388, repr. in: idem,
limited fashion for the positive benefits of some Signs and Meanings: World and Text in Ancient Chris-
tianity, Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1996 types of theory and practice that are connected to
F. Graf, Gottesnahe und Schadenzauber: Die Magie in the idea of magic (though the word “magic” might
der griechisch-rémischen Welt, Miinchen: Beck, 1996 still be avoided by some writers interested in

--- Page 149 ---
725 MAGIC III: MIDDLE AGES
praxis, and negative uses of the word continued as “pagan” superstition, there is evident a consider-
before). In what follows we will trace the basic con- able syncretism of ritual practice (of the sort mani-
tours of the anti-magical arguments of the early fested e.g. in the Coptic texts collected in Meyer &
middle ages and outline the intellectual develop- Smith), not comforting to the Christian theologian
ments that led to the beginning of the positivization because it introduced the names of Christ, apostles
of certain ideas connected to magic in the 12th and and saints into charms, spells, and > amulets.
13th centuries. Augustine was perhaps the most powerful early
It should be taken as axiomatic that in any era exponent of anti-magical ideas, and while many
alongside any positivized view of magic there will loci in his writings get drawn into discussions of
be found negative views, and that positive and neg- magic by later writers, two have particular impor-
ative views, varyingly configured, can coexist in the tance for the present discussion. In De civitate Dei,
same time period, the same social circles, and even Book X, Augustine makes an extended attack on
in the same person. Thus in the early modern theurgy, condemning it as no better than a dis-
period, when arguments for positivized forms of guised form of necromancy. His argument upholds
magic were more common than they had been Neoplatonic thought [~ Neoplatonism] in general
before, the condemnation of magic (as “male- as the form of pagan wisdom closest to the divine
ficium”) was also harsher than it had been before: truth of Christianity, but he takes to task Por-
in the writings of the Abbot > Trithemius both phyry’s vacillation on the topic of theurgy, shoring
poles of the opposition are voiced with equal up anti-theurgic portions of Porphyry’s writings
rhetorical extremity, and the Malleus Maleficarum with his own arguments and ultimately objecting
itself is careful to define forms of “natural magic” to theurgy as inconsistent with both Christian
not counted as > witchcraft. In outlining the “pos- practice and Neoplatonic thought. In the De doc-
itivization” of magic in the later middle ages, we trina christiana Augustine similarly concerns him-
will thus be describing the recasting of an old prob- self with the discernment of truth in pagan
lem, not its elimination. If the voice of condem- literature. A discussion of the need for Christian
nation is often the loudest voice heard, the education in pagan philosophy (on the principle
intellectual climate in the later middle ages never- that wherever the truth is manifest, it is God’s)
theless undergoes an alteration in its attitude to leads to the topic of superstition; under this heading
magic on a deeper level, recuperating from Arabic he eschews magic, ~ astrology, the use of ligatures
and Hebrew sources some of the bases on which in medicine, and a detailed list of superstitious
the syntheses of magic with philosophy and theol- practices. Magic is linked to idolatry and demono-
ogy are constructed in the early modern period. latry through sign theory: because of its use of am-
biguously directed voluntary signs, which demons
1. EARLY MEDIEVAL may manipulate and use to deceive humans, magic
CONSTRUCTIONS OF MAGIC may be seen as a kind of language which humans
For the Christian middle ages the primary touch- and demons have in common. This locus became
stones of anti-magical argument were the writ- an important touchstone for later writers right
ings of the Church Fathers, particularly Tertullian through the early modern period, not only for dis-
and > Augustine. In early patristic writings anti- tinguishing what constituted a superstitious or mag-
magical polemic is typically connected to invective ical practice for the purpose of condemning it, but
against paganism. It may be noted that these con- also in distinguishing what constituted “natural”
demnations of paganism had a strong intellectual- magic (a concept alien to Augustine himself) from
ist bias, and Patristic writers could often be seen the demonic kind which involved voluntary signs.
carving out a space for the admirable aspects of Other treatments of magic condemn it in a way
pagan literature and philosophy while taking to that is more colorful, literary and mythic. Early
task pagan ritual practices described in the same medieval encyclopedic texts, whose discussions of
texts. The primary concern of the Christian writers magic mostly derive with variations from the entry
in this period was less over the continuance of on Magi in the Etymologies of Isidore of Seville (ca.
pagan religion as such than over the possibility of 5 60-636), are in accord that magic arts were deliv-
heterodoxy, manifested as worry that unacceptable ered to human beings by bad angels; their first
forms of “pagan” practice might be introduced or human exponent is > Zoroaster. Isidore’s entry on
adapted into Christian contexts, or taint texts that “magi” includes a catalogue of magical arts which
Christians were likely to read and take seriously. would remain a standard topos in medieval writ-
This worry was not without foundation, since ings long after many of the practices listed had
alongside these attempts to purify Christianity of ceased to be used or had changed meaning: these

--- Page 150 ---
MAGIC III: MIDDLE AGES 726
include necromancy, hydromancy, pyromancy, other theologians to the idea that any type of magic
aeromancy, geomancy, various other methods of should be included in the curriculum of legitimate
classical divination [> Divinatory Arts], and learning, the influence of Arabic treatises in natural
astrology. Isidore’s list is compiled from a variety of philosophy provided an entry point for the locu-
classical writers (Virgil, Lucan, Varro), as well as tion “natural magic” into learned discourse. There
the Bible and Patristic sources; he quotes Augus- is evident, in this period, a more subtle attention to
tine’s prohibition on the use of ligatures in medi- distinctions between individual practices that
cine, equating the effect of such ligatures, as might once simply have been classified as magical
Augustine does, but more literally, with demonic (and illicit) without qualification. + Michael Scot
activity. On the whole his negative view of magic divided astrology and magic into permissible and
tends to concretize and mythologize much that impermissible categories, as did the author of the
remained metaphorical, theoretical and abstract in Speculum Astronomiae, focusing on specific texts
Augustine’s writing. in circulation and drawing careful distinctions
Other sources for the condemnation of magic between them, defending as licit a few types of
include legal tracts and penitentials which manifest image magic and geomancy, which seemed to work
a more immediate concern for folk practices con- only by occult natural powers. Albertus Magnus,
tinuing through this period. These add little to the + Roger Bacon, and others express concern over
theoretical grounds either for the suppression and the fact that the large number of demonic or cor-
exclusion of practices identified as magical, or for rupt works in circulation might have caused some
the inclusion of certain specific forms of magic as authorities to accuse other books of containing
lawful, though it has been argued by Valerie Flint illicit demonic magic as well, while in fact they con-
that many such practices were in fact deliberately tain legitimate and useful natural knowledge — an
adopted and adapted, made over into a “Christian argument which is already a kind of rhetorical set-
magic” without which the Church could not suc- piece, and emerges in many early modern apologies
cessfully have competed with pagan religions. for magic as well. Even the more conservatively
However, the adoptions of new forms of ritual Augustinian Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274), in the
were not defended as “magic” by their Christian process of condemning talismanic magic in general
exponents and there is as yet no basis for the use of in the Summa contra gentiles (III, 105), makes an
the term “magic” or its cognates in the positivized allowance for figures which may acquire power
sense implicit in the notion of “natural magic”. from the stars, provided that they do not include
letters or characters. In his ban on characters he
2. LATE MEDIEVAL CONSTRUCTIONS OF shows a concern for the strictures against demonic
Macic: NATURAL PHILOSOPHY communication laid out in Augustine’s De doctrina
Riding in on the wave of Latin translations of christiana; but in his allowance for artificial forms
Arabic philosophy in the 12th and 13th centuries without writing on them he shows both a height-
came a number of texts with a magical orientation, ened sensitivity to the idea of stellar influence and a
including works of astrology, > alchemy, and looser notion of what might constitute a sign than
image magic. Connected to the interest in these Augustine does.
areas there also appeared classifications or schemes In fact there were close connections between the
of learning, likewise deriving from Arabic sources, developing interest in astrological theory and the
which tentatively included magical arts among the loosened notion of what might (or might not) con-
standard divisions of knowledge. Dominic Gundis- stitute a sign. The treatise De radiis stellarum by
salinus (fl. mid-12th century) composed a work, the Arabic philosopher > Al-Kindi, widely circu-
De divisione scienciarum, where the subdivision lated in Latin translation from the 13th century on,
of physics (drawn from Alfarabi [?-950], whose exercised a strong though mostly unacknowledged
works he translated) includes judicial astrology, influence on the ideas of what constituted natural
medicine, natural necromancy, image magic, agri- magic. Al-Kindi argued that words as well as char-
culture, navigation, alchemy, and optics. This acters and images were infused with the power of
attempt to include magical arts among legitimate the stars just as all other natural and artifical
sciences hardly went unopposed; in the same time objects were. For most late-medieval readers there
period, Hugh of St. Victor (?-1142) wrote about were philosophical difficulties in countenancing the
magic only to exclude it vehemently from the claims for verbal power made by Al-Kindi because
domain of legitimate knowledge as a type of false of the very direct connection drawn by him
knowledge. between the power and meaning of words and
Despite the opposition of Hugh of St Victor and signs, which fell afoul of Augustine in one direction

--- Page 151 ---
727 MAGIC III: MIDDLE AGES
and Aristotle in another. However the idea that being included in the medieval category of “natu-
words or sounds might nevertheless carry occult ral” magic. Nevertheless, ritual magic texts had a
virtue had support in other branches of philoso- strong influence (though again largely unacknowl-
phy. Roger Bacon himself argues for the power of edged) on the developing idea of what magic was.
words (without at any point mentioning Al-Kindi’s It must be remembered that the strong concern
treatise, though he is clearly familiar with it), rely- with the distinction of licit from illicit books and of
ing on ideas current in medicine, optics and more occult natural powers from demons so evident in
reputable branches of astrology to buttress his texs like the Speculum Astronomiae is largely a
statements. result of the fact that the texts under examination
Though the notion that words and characters made no such distinctions themselves. “Necro-
might have a “natural” power was always carefully mantic” books might contain a broad variety of
qualified in the most philosophically rigorous experiments shading in one direction into innocu-
texts, by the end of the 14th century the number of ous astrological magic and in the other into techni-
practices that might be included relatively unprob- cal recipes or party tricks. Ritual texts of all types
lematically under the heading “natural magic” had might open with claims that they transmitted
grown considerably larger. In the late 14th century divine secrets, the ancient wisdom of Hermes, or
Confessio Amantis of John Gower (ca. 1330-1408) angelic knowledge; or they might introduce injunc-
the four divinatory modes listed in Isidore’s cata- tions to purity and secrecy suggesting the possibil-
logue as hydromancy, pyromancy, aeromancy and ity of corruption of their contents by demonic
geomancy, are classified as “natural” and accept- agency or human carelessness. These topoi are
able, although all of these had been excluded from echoed in the suspicion of philosophers that some
legitimate knowledge by Hugh of St Victor and, of of these texts contained legitimate knowledge and
the four, only geomancy had been given limited that they were sometimes condemned without rea-
acceptance as “natural” by Albertus Magnus. This son. Indeed the widespread condemnation of many
loosening and expanding of ideas that might fall practices, texts, and individuals which became
into the category “natural magic” was in part due increasingly common through the 13th and 14th
to the increasing popularity and vernacular dis- centuries (often with motives that were clearly
semination of books like the pseudo-Aristotelian political or self-serving), had the effect of making
Secret of Secrets, which were never theologically individuals more reliant on their own judgment
questionable in the same way that the De radiis in spiritual matters than they might otherwise
was, but relied implicitly on related ideas of astral have been. A combination of factors thus con-
influence, ~ correspondences, and the power of spired to make the copying and use of such texts,
human intention, and became a frequent resource and the discernment of their natural, divine and
of popular writers and encyclopedists. In the late demonic elements, very much a matter of individ-
14th century “magic” was more heatedly con- ual judgement.
demned than ever, but a quantity of esoteric knowl- In angelic magic, perhaps, we come closest to the
edge had now become mainstream. kind of radical positivization of magic characteris-
tic of early modern texts, though without any
3. More Late MEDIEVAL attempt to justify the operations in them as “natu-
CONSTRUCTIONS: RITUAL MAGIC ral.” In the proem to the Sworn Book of Honorius,
In addition to the expansion of ideas categorized magic is defended against the libelous charges of
as natural magic, the later middle ages saw an bishops and prelates, whom the author suggests
increased circulation of texts of ritual magic. These have been diabolically inspired. But what is meant
included both experiments in which demons were by “magic” here has nothing to do with occult nat-
summoned and bound, and rituals of a prima facie ural power, but rather with the magician’s power of
more credibly Christian character like the Ars binding and loosing spirits. Defending magic as a
notoria and the Sworn Book of Honorius, relying high and ancient wisdom, the writer of the Sworn
on the invocation of angels and other divine enti- Book argues that spirits are constrained only by
ties. Some of these show filiations with Hebrew clean men, not wicked ones. In the theurgic opera-
texts like the Liber Rasiel and probably derive tions of the Ars notoria by contrast the word
from Jewish paradigms (as argued by Kieckhefer “magic” is not used at all; though the work is
[1998]); others show an array of Arabic Neopla- widely characterized as sorcerous by theologians, it
tonic and Hermetic strands [> Hermetic Litera- represents itself as a set of holy prayers delivered to
ture]. Clearly no type of ritual involving overt Solomon by an angel allowing the user to obtain
conjuring or invocation of spirits had any hope of infused knowledge of the liberal arts, philosophy

--- Page 152 ---
MAGIC III: MIDDLE AGES 728
and theology. In the Liber visionum of John of monastic or clerical contexts, although courts and
Morigny (fl. 1304-1318), we are able to trace some universities were also important centres of trans-
of the ambiguities of the medieval operator’s per- mission. Much of it was written in Latin rather
spective on this text. John describes a developing than vernacular languages until the r5th century
relation to the Ars notoria; he begins by accepting when an increasingly literate laity began to trans-
the view articulated by the text itself that the mit it as well. In principle it was a practical litera-
prayers are holy and without danger of any sin but ture to bring about physical effects or to acquire
through a series of visions comes to see that the text otherwise hidden information. In various ways,
has been corrupted by demons. Recognizing that medieval magical literature blended traditions and
the knowledge the Ars notoria claims to transmit is beliefs native to the Latin West with those imported
nevertheless necessary for salvation, John sets out from Arabic, Jewish, and a variety of other ancient
to recuperate its divine aspects in a new art, the sources.
Liber visionum, which is delivered to him at his
request by the Virgin Mary. The Liber visionum 1. GENERAL DIVISIONS
characterizes itself as magical no more than the Ars In the literature of magic, a workable division
notoria does, but it may be noted that within its can be made between magical texts assumed to
prayers even the exceptive (or magical) arts are draw on natural forces (usually astrological), and
transmitted by the Cherubim in the penultimate those deriving magical efficacy from ritual acts or
part of the ritual for the deliverance of philosophy. the numinous power of Christian faith. In general
What is made explicit in the Sworn Book is implicit scribes were interested in one or the other, and the
here too: the magic arts in their purified form rep- two groups of texts tended to be transmitted in dif-
resent not merely innocuous natural knowledge, ferent ways. Within these two categories a wide
but a holy wisdom whose earthly form only has spectrum of texts may be found, running from
been corrupted. those deemed acceptable by some intellectual
While the radical positivization of magical ideas authorities to those well outside the bounds of
found in texts like the Sworn Book could hardly be legitimacy by almost any standard. For example,
expected to find orthodox acceptance, the very fact amongst the more inoffensive ritual magical prac-
that ritual magic texts exist in numerous manu- tices are charms which employ standard ritual acts
script copies constitutes evidence that the late such as the reciting of the Lord’s Prayer for the cure
medieval idea of magic had come some distance of toothaches or the staunching of blood. At the
from the tightly restricted Augustinian definition. other extreme, necromantic manuals claim the
Though there was as yet no grand unified theory power to control demonic forces through the use of
drawing together the varied strands of positivized rituals developed from liturgical sources, particu-
magic (of the sort > Agrippa and others were later larly exorcism. Texts recording the occult proper-
to provide), the essential elements for such a syn- ties of stones or animals and their uses stood at one
thesis were already in place. By the 14th century end of the spectrum of natural magic. At the other,
there is a generally more open acknowledgment of texts like the Liber lune or Picatrix justified a range
the importance of astrological theory and the sys- of practices highly suspect in Christian terms such
tem of > correspondences based in it (in formal as the carving of images, incantation, and suffumi-
natural philosophy as well as more arcane sources); gation as natural. This latter group and the notion
there is increasing acknowledgment and accept- of natural magic became very significant with the
ance of the existence of a variety of forms of natu- influx of the corpus of Arabic learning.
ral magic (as well as increased argument over what
these consist of); and there is an evident increase in 2. CHANGES OVER TIME
experimentation with theurgic practices, as well as The Latin West inherited a rich tradition of mag-
theories and technologies involving hierarchies of ical literature from antiquity as well as from native,
angels, demons, planetary spirits and the like. It is non-Christian sources. But the most significant
against this background that the subsequent emer- producer of a written literature was the church
gence of the large scale magical syntheses in the itself, not least because, prior to the 12th century,
early modern period must be seen. the major centres of learning were religious institu-
tions, principally monasteries. The surviving litera-
B. LITERATURE ture from the 4th through the 12th century is
Medieval magical literature was the product of substantially more limited than material dating
authors with some level of book learning. In large from the later middle ages. Although this is par-
measure it was preserved and transmitted in tially related to the lower survival rate of manu-

--- Page 153 ---
729 MAGIC III: MIDDLE AGES
scripts and a relatively smaller learned community, recipes, charms, and prognostics were preserved by
it may also be that prior to the influx of Arabic secular and non-academic scribes in vernacular
material the body of magical literature was, even in texts such as commonplace books.
relative terms, smaller. Charms may be frequently Magical manuscripts were also vulnerable to
found in manuscripts dating to before the 12th cen- destruction on the one hand because they could be
tury. They commonly employ Christian formulae regarded as theologically problematic and on the
for the cure of a variety of ailments. Prognostic other because they were often cheaply and hastily
devices also commonly occur. Continuity with the prepared and hence evidently of small value to any-
magic of the ancient world may be most simply one besides their immediate owners. The surviving
demonstrated by the continued appearance of the pool of evidence for medieval magical literature
SATOR AREPO magic square. was shaped by these forces, and so to reconstruct
Magical literature was profoundly influenced by the original contours of medieval literature, we
the influx of learning in the 12th and 13th cen- must know why manuscripts survived. Some no
turies. The Arabic philosophical and astrological doubt were passed from one occult practitioner to
corpus provided a theoretical framework well another; the institutions where such practitioners
suited to justifying numerous forms of magical tended to cluster were thus very important. But the
practice. It also contained a significant magical lit- likelihood of a manuscript surviving purely by this
erature most of which claimed to function though means (i.e. an unbroken chain of students and
astrological mechanisms. Although the literature teachers) is infinitesimally small and other reasons
of necromancy (the manipulation of demonic account for all known survivals. Most magical
forces through exorcism-like practices) can only be texts were short and made up only a small part of
dated to the period after the 12th century, its close the larger codices which contained them. Their sur-
relation to the liturgy suggests that the practice has vival thus depended more upon the general (and
its roots as much in the Latin West as in the rich usually more legitimate) contents of the codex
confluence of Arabic, Jewish, and Christian tradi- which contained them. Larger texts, such as works
tions in such centres as Toledo. Divinatory prac- of ritual magic, tended to survive by being collected
tices and prognostics also pre-date the Arabic by bibliophiles or in large libraries. They might also
influx as do texts recording the occult properties of survive purely by accident, as novelties, or in rare
stones or creatures, although both of these forms cases as fine manuscripts. In general however — and
were also supplemented by comparable Arabic particularly in the case of ritual magic — the origi-
literature. nal number of magical manuscripts was much
higher than the numbers of surviving manuscripts
3. TRANSMISSION AND SURVIVAL suggest.
The survival of a magical literature depended in
large measure upon the survival of the manuscripts 4. GENRES
in which it was transmitted. The principal institu- Subtypes of magical Literature defy precise
tional centres of transmission were universities classification. However, workable divisions may be
(particularly medical faculties), the lower levels of derived from the treatment of magical texts within
the secular church, and monasteries. The profes- the medieval library or book. As such these divi-
sions commonly responsible for manuscript copies sions should not be understood as deriving from
of magic texts were lower level clerics, monks, the technical features of the magic they contain, but
and medical practitioners. This had two principal rather as akin to a literary genre with certain com-
results. First, the perspective of magical texts mon forms, interests, contexts, and emphases.
tended to be learned and frequently religious. Sec- A. Divination. All types of divination typically
ond, proscriptive literature and the central intellec- employ some form of randomization of form or
tual currents of the day profoundly influenced the symbol, subsequently interpreted in order to dis-
manner in which texts were authored, presented cover hidden information of a specific kind. As a
on the page, translated, edited, and transmitted result divination crosses over with a great number
(for specific examples see the individual genres of magical genres (e.g. where ritual or astrological
below). Magical learning was also preserved in magic seek specific kinds of information). It is also
non-magical settings. Encyclopaedic literature some- one of the most common forms of medieval magi-
times incorporated sections of magical texts as cal literature. If a magical text does not contain div-
examples of natural wonders. Finally, the spread of inatory techniques, a work of divination may often
literacy in the later middle ages also meant that a be found among the other texts which accompany
growing portion of magical literature, especially it in a codex.

--- Page 154 ---
MAGIC III: MIDDLE AGES 732
Although terms for divination or diviners (e.g. shortest. Usually occupying only a few lines of text,
sortes or sortilegi) were frequently used to describe these formulae populate margins, pastedowns, and
all forms of magic, divinatory practices tended to blank spaces of medieval manuscripts. They com-
be condemned less often and less severely in theo- monly employ Christian words of power, prayers,
logical sources. Among the more significant forms or gesture against illness and injury.
of medieval divination are chiromancy, spatula- D. Astrological or Astral Magic. This form of
mancy, oneiromancy, and geomancy: chiromancy magic may be attributed almost entirely to the
examined lines on the palm, spatulamancy employed influx of Arabic sources in the 12th and 13th cen-
the shoulder blade of sheep, oneiromancy sought turies. The principle that astrological influences
to interpret dreams, and geomancy associated ran- could be manipulated through the use of physical
domized patterns in points or stones and associated objects was a standard part of Arabic astrological
them with astrological principles. A range of prog- and medical literature. As a result the accompany-
nostic devices employing charts, moving wheels, ing texts of astrological magic came to be regarded
and other textual devices were also common, espe- as a potentially legitimate portion of natural phi-
cially those used for medical purposes. Some of the losophy. Arabic astrological magic usually employed
techniques such as the casting of nativities, various rings or talismans to focus or direct astrological
forms of medical prognostics, and even techniques influences for certain kinds of effects. The magical
for determining the location of stolen goods object, whose material was related to the desired
employed astrological principles. Finally, many of influence (e.g. Sun-gold, Mars-Copper, etc.), was to
the practices of ritual magic involving demons or be prepared under the correct astrological condi-
angels could also be regarded as divinatory in the tions, often with accompanying ritual practices,
sense that they sought information rather than a prayers, or suffumigations. In some circumstances
concrete magical effect. In this context, the most a planetary deity would be invoked.
common techniques were the pursuit of dream As they were transmitted to a Christian context,
visions or the use of a young boy as a medium. the ritual features tended to be muted, transformed
B. Experiments, Books of Secrets, and Recipes. into Christian forms, or removed. The Speculum
Books of experiments, secrets, and recipes may be Astronomiae usually attributed to Albertus Mag-
said to occupy a position on the fringes of magical nus, for example, condemned all but two texts of
practice in the sense that much of their contents are astrological image magic as clearly containing
devoted to practical matters such as the making of demonic elements: the use of invocations, suffumi-
ink or beer. The terms experimenta and secreta gations, and astral deities. By far the most com-
were used to describe processes with a marvellous monly copied versions were those, such as Thabit
or magical effect; the term recipe is simply the first ibn Qurra’s De imaginibus, in which these kinds of
word in instructions for making some kind of con- elements were removed. At the same time, al-
coction. At the same time, the authors and scribes though in much smaller numbers, other texts such
of this literature considered the contents, which as the Picatrix or Liber lune were copied including
include a significant amount of magical material, as all of these more dubious elements. Yet even these
a coherent set of practices. Magical features might more dubious texts tended to be regarded as related
include means of determining the fidelity of a to astrology and natural philosophy by their
spouse with a magnet, magical tricks, medical tal- scribes and collectors.
ismans, or even demonic or angelic magic. They E. Ritual Magic. Texts of ritual magic rely prin-
also reflected certain characteristics of magical cipally upon Christian religious texts and practice
texts such as the aura of secrecy they invoke. These for their structure and justification. Drawing
texts are in large measure instructional manuals. A heavily upon the bible and liturgical sources (in
typical experiment, recipe, or secret would be particular exorcism), their practices elaborate
expressed in a single paragraph and a typical col- assumptions commonplace in the Judaeo-Christian
lection could consist of anywhere from a dozen to tradition: the possibility of mystical enlightenment,
hundreds of these. Since scribes freely deleted and the power of ritual action, prayer and moral purity,
added information the contents of this literature and the accessibility of angels and demons. Charms
tended to be relatively fluid although in some cases, might thus be considered a form of ritual magic,
such as the Secretum secretorum, a textual tradi- but the term is generally used to designate much
tion may be traced. A large proportion were writ- longer texts and ones considered far more prob-
ten or translated into the vernacular. lematic in theological terms. Common sub-catego-
C. Charms. Charms are perhaps the most ubig- rizations are angelic, astral, theurgic, and demonic
uitous genre of magical literature. They are also the magic. Yet these terms must be used with caution

--- Page 155 ---
732 MAGIC IV: RENAISSANCE-17TH CENTURY
since collections of ritual magic practices compiled contemplative exercises using complex figures
by single individuals frequently combine these ele- (notae) or common devotional images. In general,
ments. Ritual magic collections tend to take on the prayers directly address God, although they
two forms, magic which almost entirely involves may also address individual members of the trinity,
angelic powers (e.g. Ars notoria, Liber sacer, and Mary, Angels, or the Saints. They are also so ortho-
Liber Rasielis) and magic which involves demonic dox in flavour that manuscripts of the notory art
and angelic powers, usually referred to as necro- have been mistaken for prayer formularies.
mancy (i.e., “ecromantia or nigromantia). Although the texts seem to imply an automatic
Necromantic manuals typically focus on the con- response, they assiduously maintain the supplica-
juring and deploying of demons for purposes rang- tory status of the operator.
ing from the manipulation of people for sexual
purposes, to treasure hunting, to the acquisition of Lit.: Charles Burnett, Magic and Divination in the
general knowledge. The power of the operator Middle Ages, Aldershott: Variorum, 1996 # William
Eamon, Science and the Secrets of Nature: Books of
derives from strict religious discipline (at least dur-
Secrets in Medieval and Early Modern Culture, Prince-
ing the magical exercises), including abstinence, ton: Princeton University Press, 1994 ¢ Claire Fanger
prayer, confession, communication, and penance. (ed.), Conjuring Spirits: Texts and Traditions of Medie-
Ritual performances, also derived from the liturgy, val Ritual Magic, Stroud, Gloucestershire: Sutton Pub-
are understood to have inherent power as well. The lishing, 1998 ¢ Valerie Flint, The Rise of Magic in
operations, loosely based upon exorcism, summon Early Medieval Europe, Princeton: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1991 Richard Kieckhefer, Magic in the
and bind demons through the power of the duly
Middle Ages, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
prepared Christian operator and his invocation of
1989 ¢ idem, Forbidden Rites: A Necromancer’s Man-
Christ or God, often identified by a long series of ual of the Fifteenth Century, Stroud, Gloucestershire:
mystical names. Common also are the use of suffu- Sutton Publishing, 1997 ¢ Marvin Meyer & Richard
migations, magical equipment such as rings, magi- Smith, Ancient Christian Magic: Coptic Texts of Rit-
cal images or circles, and ritual gesture. The time of ual Power, New York: HarperSanFrancisco, 1994 ¢
operation might be restricted to certain days, hours, Edward Peters, The Magician, the Witch and the Law,
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1978 ¢
or astrological and atmospheric conditions. Necro-
Lynn Thorndike, A History of Magic and Experimen-
mantic texts also commonly include petitions (as tal Science, 8 vols, New York: Columbia University
opposed to demands) for angelic assistance in Press, 1923 @ J.A. Weisheipl, “Medieval Classification
discerning truth or for direct illumination. This of the Sciences”, Medieval Studies 27 (1965), 54-89 ¢
angelic magic is a common enough part of the lit- Paola Zambelli, The Speculum Astronomiae and its
erature to be regarded as one of its inherent fea- Enigma; Astrology, Theology, and Science in Albertus
Magnus and his Contemporaries, London: Kluwer
tures. Astrological magic, sometimes reworked to
Academic Publishers, 1992.
include binding rituals, sometimes entirely inno-
cent of demonic or angelic forces may also be some- CLAIRE FANGER (A) & FRANK KLAASSEN (B)
times found in these collections. Characterized by a
high level of textual fluidity, necromantic collec-
tions were rarely copied as a whole but were usu- Magic IV: Renaissance-17th Century
ally compilations of extracts from other manuals,
TUN R ODUCTLON 2 aD Er© ALOadaptations from liturgical or magical sources, and
3. THE NATURAL Way 4. THE MAINnew material written by the collector.
TEXTBOOKS, 5. LHE MAGIC oF Angelic powers occupy a central position in the
other major form of ritual magic from the later QUANTITY 6. CONCLUSION
middle ages. The most significant medieval text is
the notory art, which claims to provide a method 1. INTRODUCTION
for acquiring spiritual or intellectual gifts from The contribution of the early modern period to
the Holy Spirit through angelic intermediaries. A the perception of “magic” consists essentially of a
related text, the Sworn Book of Honorius, claims number of more or less famous attempts at theo-
to provide a twenty-eight day ritual which will rizing and systematizing it; indeed, it may well be
result in no less than the beatific vision. How the asserted that one of the tasks assumed by Renais-
gifts may be infused or the visions take place is not sance philosophy has been that of providing west-
always clear, although both waking and dream ern culture with a hitherto absent “general theory
visions are common contexts. These manuals rely of magic”. But the business of picking up and com-
on a combination of ascetic and religious obser- bining the various existing threads of magical tra-
vances, prayer, and in the case of the notory art, ditions, besides being no easy task, obviously

--- Page 156 ---
MAGIC IV: RENAISSANCE-17TH CENTURY Vike
implied that they had already acquired some degree knowledge; and the status of the human > imagi-
of acceptance. It must be realized, however, that nation and the faculties of the soul (both cosmic
even during the acme of Humanism, the measured and individual).
acceptance enjoyed by magic never turned to over- Thus, considered from an overall perspective,
all legitimacy, as readily shown by the choice exam- the study of magic in the early modern period
ples of Simon de Phares being condemned by the entails scrutinizing the multiple interactions of nat-
Sorbonne (1494; an event likely to have deterred > ural philosophy with theology and anthropology,
Jacques Lefévre d’Etaples from publishing his De seen against the general background of the chris-
magia naturali), or of > Giovanni Pico della tianization of neoplatonic [ Neoplatonism], her-
Mirandola (1487) and > Marsilio Ficino (1489), metic |-* Hermetism], Jewish [~ Jewish Influences]
each hastily composing an Apologia in order to and arabic doctrines and symbolic practices.
atone for their explicit recourse to, and positiviza-
tion of, magic. 2) DB PEL CAMEO
On the whole, the distinction between natural Even though it has been held (rightly, in our
and ritual magic (seldom so neatly outlined in the opininon) that magic, like astrology or > alchemy,
texts themselves) was still countenanced by most does not so much depend on any single philosoph-
Renaissance philosophers and magi, even though ical framework, as that it mainly functions accord-
the elaboration of a synthetic approach had, in ing to a certain world picture (vision du monde)
many cases, the not-so-paradoxical effect of par- and, for this reason, can in fact be subjected to
tially blurring the basic differences that were a variety of theoretical approaches, it has been vin-
assumed to exist between them. dicated by Renaissance thinkers from several
With respect to natural magic, essentially the philosophical perspectives. Most important and
ancient topos (which eventually goes back to Aris- influential is, of course, that of Marsilio Ficino
totle) of a complementary opposition between Art (1433-1499), which P. Zambelli has shown to be
and Nature remains at the root of a conception of consistently grounded in Plato’s doctrine of “par-
magical action as consisting of strictly natural ticipation”, ever since the Florentine’s 1469 com-
operations, in which human industry has the role mentary to the Symposium. In a fashion roughly
of a steward, merely assisting the occult [> occult / similar to the later stoic sympatheia, “platonic
occultism] natural powers, which it helps combine, love” is here taken to represent the universal bond
harmonize and interweave. Needless to say, such which exists between all parts of the living cosmos,
views necessarily imply the theories of cosmic and and makes it an organic being; magic has its foun-
human analogy, of universal signs and > corre- dation in the resulting universal pattern of mutual
spondences, and of astral influences which are at attraction and repulsion. The “wholeness” and
the basis of (antique and) medieval “natural phi- unity of the universal structure is understood as the
losophy”. The debate, hotly pursued during the expression, on a larger scale, of that of the human
entire Renaissance, over the exact nature and body; moreover, to complete the classic analogy,
modus operandi of astrological influences [> both man and the universe are endowed with an
astrology], and consequently over the magical ones animating soul, which ensures the presence of life
as well, and the consequences of such a debate on in them, and serves as ontological intermediary
contemporary discussions of causality, is sig- between man and the higher, intellectual (angelic)
nificant not only in determining the epistemologi- principles, which in turn are in contact with the
cal status of magic per se; these discussions were divine sphere.
also central to humanistic conceptions of “nature” Thus, the ficinian spiritus, considered either on
and ontology, both of them bearing on contempo- the astral or human level (both aspects being of
rary logic and philosophy of knowledge. course hierarchically related), mediates between
Something similar can be said about ritual rational soul and body and is fundamental in link-
magic, which was considered a highly questionable ing them and maintaining their ontological cohe-
endeavour but one that nevertheless raised impor- sion. Taking into account the dual side of this
tant issues. Among them are the intrinsic nature of immaterial entity (which is more bodily than the
the beings invoked (demons and/or angels, or soul, but more soul-like than the body), a connec-
“divine” entities), and their link to (and dominion tion is readily established with astrology, and also
over) the celestial spheres and varied natural sub- with the various kinds of planetary spirits, angels
stances/elements; the “evocative” power of lan- or demons populating (ever since the Epinomis) the
guage and its theological assessment; the impact of celestial spheres, as well as the terrestrial elements.
moral intention(s) on the practical efficiency of Quite obviously, such a connection makes it

--- Page 157 ---
HO, MAGIC IV: RENAISSANCE-17TH CENTURY
difficult to draw the line between what purportedly parts of natural philosophy, but the angelic realm
pertains to “natural” and to ritual magic respec- as well — and notwithstanding the unsystematic
tively, and the more so since Ficino blends a med- nature of Pico’s exposé -, such a conception of kab-
ical with a “spiritual” purpose in his De vita balah ran the risk of again blurring the borderline
coelitus comparanda (1489). To a strictly meta- between ritual and natural magic; and the more so
physical process of deification, sought through the since the use and efficacy of voces et verba in
assumed power of intellectual contemplation to magico opere were explicitly advocated (Concl.
induce an actual transformation in man, are asso- Mag., 19-22), although Pico referred to the vox
ciated magical traditions about how to carry out Dei as their ultimate source.
the soul’s ascension (and/or healing), making use of This performative power of words and names
the complete hierarchy of cosmological intermedi- is central to the theories of Christian kabbalists
aries. One must note that both these approaches preoccupied with magic, such as Pico and his fol-
(the first philosophico-theological, the second lower > Johann Reuchlin (1455-1522), who relies
“theurgic”) have “pagan” as well as Christian heavily on the vis verborum imparted by God’s
antecedents, all of them present and blended in var- Word to the angels and to the Hebrew language.
ious ways in Ficino’s presentation. Ficino’s rela- Man is supposed to dominate sublunary nature,
tively novel combination of a metaphysics of light and be reunited with Christ, essentially through the
(divine, solar, angelic and intellectual) and of correct enunciation of the angelic and divine
knowledge, on the one hand, with the influence of names, which all ultimately derive from the super-
celestial spheres and spirits, astral powers and the nal Logos. In Reuchlin’s 1494 De verbo mirifico,
world soul, as well as human souls, on the other this particular form of Christian theurgy is pre-
(not to mention his references to artefacts such as sented as heavily dependent on the union of natures
talismans and invocations), would exert a durable in the Incarnation, on the eternal presence of God’s
influence on almost all notable later Renaissance Word within man and on the miracle-working,
magi, such as > Agrippa, > Dee, > Bruno and > almighty pentagrammatic name of Jesus, which
Campanella. holds power over the whole creation. In his 1517
Following the impetus of Giovanni Pico della De arte cabalistica, however, a notable shift occurs,
Mirandola, Renaissance magic furthermore comes by which the theurgic (“sonic”) use of names is
to be closely associated (at times even identified) assigned a role heavily subordinate to a type of
with kabbalah [> Jewish Influences]. If Pico relates intellectualistic, inner approach to the contempla-
magic and astrology, assigning to the first the prac- tive ascent and deificatio of the mind (akin to what
tice of handling both heavenly and terrestrial pow- we already found in Ficino, who of course did not
ers (virtutes), nowhere does he attempt to lay out a ignore this question of the “essential” derivation of
comprehensive or synthetic exposition of magic as “divine names”, which he compared either to the
such, although he stresses the licit character of animation of the body by the soul [Theol. plat. X,
“natural magic” as the ‘practical’ and ‘most noble 7], or to that of the hermetic statues [In Cratylum)]).
part of scientia naturalis’ (Concl. Mag. [II s.], 1-4). It is only in a later context that kabbalah
To the underlying idea, referred to above, of magic (“gabalia”) will come to be understood as almost
as essentially an illustration of Art complementing synonymous with magic and/or alchemy, main-
the work of Nature, “wedding” heaven and earth stays of “nature mysticism” within Paracelsian [>
by uniting and actualizing their potential virtues Paracelsianism] and Rosicrucian [> Rosicrucian-
(ibid., 5 8& 10-11, 13), he adds that magical ism] discourses. For instance, the anonymous
efficiency is in any case dependent on the addition, commentary (traditionally ascribed to J. Arndt
to the operatio magica proper, of an opus cabale [1555-1621], and published in 1602) on the four
(ibid., 15). In several passages of the so-called Dis- engravings illustrating the original edition (1595)
course on the Dignity of Man and of his Apology, of > Heinrich Khunrath’s famous Amphitheatrum
Pico in turn equates kabbalah (at least according to @terne sapientie, equates magic and kabbalah
some of the manifold understandings of it that are with, respectively, natural and supernatural or
to be found in his works) with the science of the angelic light.
powers of celestial bodies, with the superior part of Akin in many respects to those outlined above,
“natural magic”, with the metaphysics of intelligi- the magical efforts of the benedictine abbot >
ble and angelic forms, and with a theology of the J. Trithemius were essentially concerned with pro-
Godhead, but wavers (except in the last case) as viding a positive defense of magic, as a spiritually
regards its divine (revealed) or merely human sta- commendable branch of Christian theology. In-
tus. Thus covering not only astrology and magic as structed by his master, Libanius Gallus (himself an

--- Page 158 ---
MAGIC IV: RENAISSANCE-17TH CENTURY 734
avowed former student of ars notoria), to imitate his propensity to equate magic with a particular
Pico in closely discriminating between natural and variety of Christian mysticism.
demonic types of magical achievements, the Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa, who actually vis-
learned abbot also blends greek and kabbalistic ited Trithemius in his Wiirzburg cloister in 1509
materials (which he owed to Reuchlin) into his and, the following year, dedicated to him the first
overall theory of magic. Here again, kabbalah is draft of his famous De occulta philosophia (printed
related to the angelic realm; and the network of in 1533), unsurprisingly belongs to the same cur-
heavenly and terrestrial correspondences, which it rent. Drawing, too, on Pico and Ficino, Agrippa
governs through the active power of words, is uni- adds to these sources the writings of several major
versally accounted for by the combined resources Christian kabbalists, such as Reuchlin (on whose
of astrology, > number symbolism, alchemy and De verbo he publicly lectured in the same year
“natural” magic. Concurrently, true magic is en- 1509), > Francesco Giorgio, and P. Rici (?-1541).
dowed with an illuminative virtue, which brings Several of these writers he even downright pla-
about internal transformation(s) within the human giarized in his encyclopedic compilation, explicitly
soul, in narrow correlation to its external effects laid out according to a threefold division of the art
on the world. Arising out of faith, allied with in “natural”, “celestial” and “ceremonial”, obvi-
virtue, knowledge and love ensure — apart from real ously correlated with the three classic hierarchical
wonder-working - the magical cleansing and realms — terrestrial, astral, angelic. More in the
ascent of the mens towards occult wisdom, and its nature of a philosophical and symbolic recapitu-
reunification with the Trinity. lation than a practical manual, despite its early-
Contradictory statements by Trithemius make it gained reputation, Agrippa’s systematization
difficult to decide whether cryptography, another mainly aims at presenting magic in general as sub-
of his major pursuits, was actually suppposed to be servient to “evangelical” imperatives and to the
based upon “natural” or angelic mediation; but it power of Christ, and as a mystic ladder for the soul
is certain that his treatises on the subject (the en route towards divine transformation. External,
famous Steganographia and Polygraphia, both more common branches of learning are subsumed
posthumously printed) helped foster the later, abu- under the central, “inner” light of sanctified oc-
sive conflation of the same topic with magic and cult knowledge, which supposedly commands all
kabbalah. others in a manner very much in line with Pico’s
On the matter of demonology, to which he perspective: mastery “within oneself” over the net-
devoted many works, our abbot stood firmly by the work of cosmic sympathies/antipathies and corre-
position of 15th century inquisitorial textbooks, spondences, eventually exteriorized as the linking
such as the famous Malleus Maleficarum (1486). of heaven and earth, is the true mystic accomplish-
His uncompromising rejection of demonic magic is ment of magical studies.
in fact perfectly consistent with his determined
Christianization of magical practices, either in the 3. THE NATURAL Way
theurgical or in the theological and contemplative The idea of a specific “light of nature” was given
slant. Demons are believed to be capable of manip- wide circulation by > Paracelsus, as an interme-
ulating the hidden and manifest forces and ele- diary between the divine sphere and the human
ments of nature, so well indeed that their power soul, where the “signatures” (his own brand of cor-
may appear nothing short of miraculous to the respondences) are mirrored and examined. For
unwary, whereas it is actually confined within Paracelsus, magic reaches above human reason and
the intrinsic boundaries of nature (which, none the experience and guides them, tapping, through a
less, are beyond the scope of ordinary human God-given revelation, the occult powers hidden by
knowledge). But even though Trithemius is clearly the creator in the “book of nature”. Duly purified
dependent, as we have seen, on the “Italian tradi- by moral virtue(s), study and empirical field-work,
tion” of the Renaissance magical revival, the bold the soul is simultaneously carried upwards and
and imaginative distinctions introduced by Ficino rendered capable of manifesting its illumination
between “personal” demons (who are assumed to in actual practice, whether medical, astrological
intentionally respond to characters and invoca- or otherwise. Underlined is also the important
tions), and “impersonal” spirits (drawn to objects complementarity between the natural and divine
and substances by a purely ontological connexio planes: by revealing the hidden influences at work
and, as such, of licit intercourse), are likely to have within nature, the magus operates “naturally”
seemed suspicious to the benedictine monk, and to what the saint effects “spiritually” (through God’s

--- Page 159 ---
735 MAGIC IV: RENAISSANCE-17TH CENTURY
agency), so that the organic intermediary between reaping superior insights from such an exalted
the Godhead and the universe, as its living “expres- source. His approach presents few original magical
sion”, is in fact man and his soul. Such conceptions features and is most anxious to only have dealings
would later become mainstays of the paracelsian with “good angels”; but by being essentially con-
current(s), and more precisely of the variegated cerned with the search for a higher, truly operative
mixture of prophetism, -> Christian theosophy, knowledge, it also partakes, up to a point, of the
eschatology, alchemy, nature mysticism, magic and progressive “naturalization” of magic, typical of
kabbalah aptly christened, by Carlos Gilly, Theo- the second half of the 16th century. Defusing, in
phrastia sancta. fact, its “religious”, spiritual or demonic garb(s),
However, partly under the influence of the so- magic is increasingly perceived as just another tool
called “school of Padua” (from > Peter of Abano for obtaining knowledge (mostly of the “natural”
[2-13.15] to Pomponazzi [1462-1524] and others), kind), almost on a par with other, apparently more
these views of magic and natural philosophy were commonplace methods of learning.
gradually confronted with an increasing “natural- This aspect of magic is not absent either in >
ization” of Western thought, in which a strong Giordano Bruno’s use of it, although his goals
revival of aristotelian physics played a major role, are also religious and reformatory. Ranging from
as a means of eschewing, as much as feasible, a the- simple collections of extracts from earlier magical
ological bias in the study of nature. According to literature (De magia mathematica), to more
such perspectives, the stress was henceforth put on extensive and original discussions, blended with
the notion of strictly natural causes, among which considerations about mathematics, kabbalah, geo-
prevail, in peripatetic philosophy, the celestial metrical seals and the art of memory [> Mne-
influences on the sublunar realm. If, thus, terres- monics] (De umbris idearum, 1582; De monade,
trial phenomena and changes are essentially due to 1591), his texts aim at laying the foundations for
the movements of heavenly spheres, “immaterial” an ambitious religious and epistemological reform,
explanations of them — in terms of demonic agency, of partly hermetic inspiration, in a complex and
spiritus or angelic rulers a la Trithemius — become novel synthesis of metaphysics and cosmology.
expendable. Magical or otherwise, theories about Here also, magic is but one of the strands of a vast
nature must first be grounded within nature itself; system of learning, which aims at expanding the
and as a result, the doctrinal frames applied to magus’ intellectual and practical powers to the
magic bear the brunt of an important epistemolog- dimensions of an ever-changing universe, using the
ical revisitation. It is not so much the intrinsic value active imagination as a lever for the communica-
of magic per se which is being questioned, but the tion between individual soul and matter.
description and analysis of its workings. Correla-
tively, more interest is also devoted to its links with 4. THE MAINn TEXTBOOKS
technical recipes and the practical procedures of The printed production of magical treatises in
different craftmanships, and with the quantitative the late 15th and during the 16th centuries was
(and not just the symbolical) side of mathematics. quite important, yet in no way did it lessen (in fact,
In this respect as well as in others, the English sci- it even increased somehow) the habit of fabricat-
entist and magus John Dee (1527-1608) is a case in ing, for private use, manuscript copies or digests
point. If he concurs with most of the above-men- of previously published (as well as unpublished)
tioned authors (whose works were all comprised in material. As confirmed by Frank Klaassen’s re-
his famous library) in viewing magic, in its higher searches (Klaassen 2003), Renaissance interest in
form (referred to as archemastrie), as the supreme magic did not turn away from the main forms it
synthesis of intellectual activity and as a spiritual had assumed in medieval times — contrary to what
vehicle for achieving proximity with God, he also was suggested by certain earlier scholars, accord-
upholds most branches of mundane knowledge as ing to whom the “enlightened” Humanists consid-
valuable inroads for inquiry into the mysteries of ered them as degraded practices, worthy only of
nature. Natural philosophy, for him, comprises contempt. On the contrary, it would seem, from
under its umbrella astrology and alchemy, crypto- Klaassen’s parallel scrutiny of printed matter
graphy and kabbalah, and even the communica- and manuscript collections, that the traditions of
tion with angels. Desperate to find truth, divine medieval ritual magic continued to flower with
and/or natural, and — by his own admission — dis- renewed fervour well into the 16th century, having
appointed even with occult learning, he turned to in the process gradually assimilated most of those
“scrying” and angelic invocations, in the hope of pertaining to talismanic/astral magic. One may

--- Page 160 ---
MAGIC IV: RENAISSANCE-17TH CENTURY 736
remark in passing that the progressive shift Cremona, or Trithemius (sometimes one even finds
(already noted by Klaassen), within late medieval an ars notoria!), this pseudo-4th book certainly
ritual magic, towards inner illumination and the influenced later magical belief and experimenta-
quest for divine revelation(s), is in fact perfectly tion, up to r9th- and 2oth-century occultism, and
consistent with the rather “mystical”, interiorized undoubtedly enhanced Agrippa’s posthumous (and
attitude to magic exhibited by most of our Renais- thoroughly undeserved) reputation as a nefarious
sance practitioners (yet, they could already find necromancer.
some support for this in the Picatrix). Among these additions to the De occulta phi-
The continued favour, indeed the prestige, losophia is also sometimes found the Arbatel, de
awarded to the (latin) Picatrix during the Renais- magia veterum (1st ed. 1575), a widely read, suc-
sance clearly testifies to the penetration of medieval cinct exposition of angelic magic in the form of
magic into the humanist era. However, the con- nine series of seven “aphorisms”, in which natural
stant mingling, within the text itself, of considera- wisdom is presented as an image of the divine one,
tions pertaining to natural purposes, talismanic which is in turn equated with vera magia; it fea-
images, astral magic and spirit invocations, seems tures quite an amount of general spiritual counsel-
a warning against the possible temptation of ing, as well as interesting reflections about the
overemphasizing the distinction between so-called natural abilities of the individual magus being
“image magic” and its ritual counterpart. Some- dependent on predestination much more than on
what later on in the Renaissance, some degree of actual learning and practice of his art. Divine grace,
blending between magical genres is often found in allied to commendable ethics on the practitioner’s
texts (and manuscripts) belonging to the Clavis part, lead the heavenly (or elemental) creatures to
Solomonis family (and also to the Almadel one); reveal the contents, both visible and invisible, of
such a blending may, hypothetically, be interpreted the entire universe. Of course, to some extent such
as reflecting a ritualization of previous astral/talis- a “spiritualized” approach to magic represents an
manic images into diagrams, geometrical figures extreme case; in any case, it did not prevent this
and seals adapted to angelic/demonic magic. The tract from being frequently lauded in later litera-
obvious Jewish origin of some of their components ture, even though its practical side is conspicuously
contributed to the growing assimilation of magic to restricted to a description of the characteres of the
kabbalah (and vice versa), as did the earlier latin seven “governors” or planetary angels.
versions of Sefer Raziel, which mainly deal with Many more such characteres (and much less
angelic invocations and insist on the importance of preaching) are to be found in the spurious Archi-
magical names and hierarchies. doxis magica attributed to Paracelsus. Famous not
Ficino’s De vita ccelitus comparanda is, of course, least because of its supposed author, this exposé
essentially concerned with astral magic, and with of natural and angelic magic was, again, influen-
drawing down celestial influences (stellar, zodiacal, tial even in modern occultism (having been trans-
planetary) into images and natural substances, so lated into several vernacular languages).
that the human soul and body may receive spiritual
and medical care from heaven. The tract is mainly 5. THE MAGIC OF QUANTITY
philosophical, indeed it is partly a loose commen- The gradual substitution, within Western natural
tary on some Plotinian doctrines, lacking in any philosophy and cosmology during the late 16th
sort of practical details. and the 17th centuries, of a metaphysical para-
About Agrippa’s De occulta philosophia, not digm by a mathematical one, by no means led to
much needs to be added here to what has already the elimination of magic. As with the influential
been stated above, except for the important fact Giambattista della Porta (1538-1615), (natural)
that its mainly “theoretical” and symbolic charac- magic becomes the practical part of natural philos-
ter probably accounts for the frequent addition to ophy. Such an assertion may well remind us of Pico
it, in numerous late 16th- and 17th-century edi- (see his statements referred to above), but even
tions (from 1567 on), of a spurious “4th book”, though Porta’s Magia Naturalis (1558; enlarged
which purports to lay out more practical instruc- ed. 1589) largely retains the conceptual framework
tions about ceremonial magic (consecration of of Pico or Agrippa, as Paola Zambelli has demon-
instruments, names, shapes and characters of good strated, its scope and intent are somewhat different.
and evil spirits, strong biblical overtones). Along The magician’s ambition is no longer solely to
with other, similar materials allegedly excerpted assist and perfect the work of nature, by resorting
from Peter of Abano (who in fact did not believe in to mainly qualitative and symbolic elements and
the very existence of spirits or demons!), Gerard of procedures; rather, through the parallel (at first still

--- Page 161 ---
To? MAGIC IV: RENAISSANCE-17TH CENTURY
rather tentative) use of applied mathematics and traditional explanations of natural interactions,
“technique”, his aim is also to analyze and try to which rested on the doctrine of universal sympathy
imitate natural processes. and correspondences. Simultaneously, the idea of
Although at one time he dabbled — mainly for an organic universe, central to the earlier magical
political reasons — in astrology and angelic invoca- approach, loses its relevance insofar as its structure
tions, the dominican ~ Tommaso Campanella is no longer perceived as an image of man and as
(1568-1639) mainly emphasized the natural side of the material expression of its living essence. In
magic in his complex philosophy of nature, illus- other words, natural knowledge is progressively
trated for instance by mechanics, which he calls separated from ontology, just as natural causes are
“real artificial magic”; its practical effects, he no longer understood as transcending their effects
thinks, are conveyed by physical contact and/or a but as homogenous with them, if not in direct phy-
“structural sympathy” (as with the magnet and sical contact with them. Such changes ended up dis-
steel), but cannot influence the human soul. As in rupting the underlying theory, inherited from
Porta’s case, notable is his upholding of a dual per- antiquity, of the unicity of nature, embracing all its
spective on magic, for the angelic side of which he levels (including angels and man) and extending in
is indebted to Ficino. a universal continuity (ontological and epistemo-
A similar attitude is present in > Robert Fludd, logical) up to the divine sphere.
for whom the knowledge of the magus and his own
brand of “experimentalism” are in fact rooted in Picatrix Latinus (ed. D. Pingree), London: The War-
burg Institute, 1986 « S.A. Farmer, Syncretism in the
the same worldview, based on a unified conception
West: Pico’s 900 Theses (1486) [crit. ed. & engl.
of theology, philosophy, science and medicine, trans.], Tempe: Medieval and Renaissance Texts and
within a christian neoplatonic frame; and — mutatis Studies, 1998 # M. Ficino, Commentaire sur le Ban-
mutandis, of course — in the great jesuitic encyclo- quet de Platon (crit. ed. & fr. trans. R. Marcel), Paris:
pedies of + Athanasius Kircher and K. Schott Les Belles Lettres, 1956 ¢ idem, Three Books on Life
(1606-1666), where magic finds itself equated with (crit. ed. & engl. transl. J.R. Clark & C. Kaske), Bing-
hampton (NY): Medieval and Renaissance Texts and
mechanical devices, optics, and magnetism.
Studies, 1989 ¢ J. Reuchlin, De Verbo mirifico (crit. ed.
Within this evolution, the stress is henceforth on & germ. trans.), Frommann-Holzboog, Stuttgart-Bad-
the practical usefulness of magic: its relevance for Cannstatt 1996 ¢ idem, De arte cabalistica (facsimile
the investigation of natural forces. It is in this ed. & engl. trans. M. & S..Goodman), New York:
respect that a > Francis Bacon retains it, as the sci- Abaris Books, 1983 ¢ H.C. Agrippa, De occulta philo-
ence pertaining to the concrete application of the sophia (ed. V. Perrone-Compagni), Leiden: Brill,
loosely defined “forms” which constitute one of 1992 ¢ Paracelsus, Selected Writings, Princeton (NJ):
Princeton University Press, 1988 @ J. Dee, A True and
the objects of metaphysics (P. Rossi). Even though
Faithful Relation... (M. Casaubon ed.), London,
the power of the imagination and of the individual 1659 [several reprints] ¢ G. Bruno, Opere Magiche
spiritus are still preserved as well, in fact we are (M. Cilberto, ed.), Milan: Adelphi Edizioni, 2000.
dealing with a novel, more strictly rational and util-
itarian conception of causality, in which cause and Lit.: M.-L. Bianchi, Signatura rerum, Rome: Edizioni
effect must be contiguous and proportionate to dell’Ateneo, 1987 ¢ N.L. Brann, Trithemius and Mag-
ical Theology: A Chapter in the Controversy over
each other. Occult Studies in Early Modern Europe, Albany (NY):
SUNY Press, 1999 @ J.N. Bremmer & J.R. Veenstra
6. CONCLUSION (eds.), The Metamorphosis of Magic from Late Anti-
As is well-known, the advent of “modern sci- quity to the Early Modern Period, Leuven: Peeters,
ence” in the 17th century tends to gradually mech- 2002 @ A. Buck (ed.), Die Okkulten Wissenschaften in
anize the image of nature and mathematize the der Renaissance, Wolfenbittel, 1992 # S. Clucas (ed.),
John Dee: Interdisciplinary Studies in Renaissance
language and methods of philosophical investiga-
Thought, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2002 B.P. Copenhaver,
tion. If natural causes may still appear derivative or “Natural Magic, Hermetism and Occultism in Modern
secondary, they nonetheless come to be considered Science”, in: D. Lindberg & R. Westman (eds.), Reap-
as constituting the proper framework and limita- praisals ofthe Scientific Revolution, Cambridge: Cam-
tion of scientific inquiry, whereas the study of the bridge University Press, 1990, 261-301 @ idem, “The
primary or “divine” causes is seen as pertaining Occultist Tradition and Its Critics”, in: D. Garber &
M. Ayers (eds.), The Cambridge History of Seven-
only to theology. Nature is known inasmuch as its
teenth-Century Philosophy, Cambridge (Mass.): Cam-
functionalities are under scrutiny, and is thus
bridge University Press, 1998, 454-512 @ D. De Rosa,
reduced to the field of human activity. Structural Magia medievale e magia rinascimentale: Marsilio
comparisons and affinities, elucidated by quantita- Ficino e la riforma magica del cristianesimo, Rome:
tive and logical procedures, tend to replace the Edizioni dello IEREF, 2000 ¢ J. Dupébe, “Uermite

--- Page 162 ---
MAGIC IV: RENAISSANCE-17TH CENTURY 738
Pelagius et les Rose-Croix”, in: C. Gilly & E Niewoh- extent the philosophical, theological, cosmological
ner (eds.), Rosenkreuz als europdisches Phanomen, and social frameworks within which those notions
Amsterdam: In de Pelikaan, 2002, 134-156 ¢ had once been at home were no longer self-evident,
W. Eamon, “Technology as magic...”, Janus 70
and they became progressively less so during the
(3/4, 1983), 171-212 @ E Fauquier, “Le magicien-
r9th and 2oth centuries. This has not caused magic
philosophe dans le Picatrix latin”, in: A. Moreau &
J.-C. Turpin (eds.), La Magie. Du monde latin au to continue merely as a stale and archaic “survival”
monde contemporain, Montpellier: Université de doomed to extinction, as suggested by E.B. Tylor in
Montpellier III], 2000 (4 vol.), [3] 129-46 ¢ the 1870s and as has long been assumed by many
M. Gabriele, [G. Bruno] Corpus iconographicum: Le scholars under the sway of the secularization the-
incisioni nelle opere a stampa, Milan: Adelphi Edi- sis; but it did mean that magic was forced to adapt
zione, 2001 ¢ C. Gilly, ““Theophrastia Sancta’ — Para-
to new worldviews and was thereby transformed
celsianism as a Religion, in Conflict with the
into new, modernized or “secularized” forms. Established Churches”, in: O.P. Grell (ed.), Paracelsus:
The Manand his Reputation, his Ideas and their Trans- The notion of magia as the religious wisdom of
formation, Leiden: Brill, 1998, 151-185 @ P. Hadot, Le the ancients, traditionally linked to the name of >
voile d’Isis: Essai sur l'histoire de lidée de nature, Zoroaster, still finds a strong echo in the article
Paris: Gallimard, 2004 ¢ F. Klaassen, “Medieval Ritual about magic in Diderot & d’Alembert’s Ency-
Magic in the Renaissance”, Aries 3:2 (2003), 166-
clopédie (1751-1772; vol. IX, 852-854), strongly
199 ¢ R. Lenoble, Histoire de l’idée de Nature, Paris,
influenced by De Saint-André’s Lettres au sujet de
1969 V. Perrone-Compagni, “Picatrix latinus”,
Medioevo i (1975), 237-337 # idem, “La magia ceri- la magie (1725). “Divine magic” is described as
moniale del Picatrix nel Rinascimento”, Atti dell’Ac- ‘nothing else but that special knowledge of the
cademia di scienze morale e politiche di Napoli 88 plans and the perspectives of the sovereign wisdom
(1978), 279-330 @ W.-E. Peuckert, Gabalia: Ein Ver- such as God gracefully reveals to feeble men ani-
such zur Geschichte der Magia naturalis im 16. bis 18. mated by his spirit — that supernatural power he
Jahrhundert, Berlin: E. Schmidt, 1967 S. Toussaint,
grants them to predict the future, to perform mira-
“Ficin, Pic de la Mirandole, Reuchlin et le pouvoir des
cles, & to read, so to speak, the hearts of those with noms”, in: W. Schmidt-Biggemann (ed.), Christliche
Kabbala (Pforzheimer Reuchlinschriften, ro), Sigma- whom they have dealings’. Such gifts must once
ringen: J. Thorbecke, 2003, 67-76 # idem, “Les raisons have existed, according to the Encyclopédie, but
de la magie: Un coup d’oeil philosophique”, Critique one may doubt whether they still do. This general
673-674 (June/July 2003), 473-483 « H. Védrine, idea of magic as a supreme religious wisdom of the
Philosophie et magie a la Renaissance, Paris: Le Livre
ancients has survived up to the present day, albeit
de Poche, 1996 ¢ D.-P. Walker, Spiritual and Demonic
without the explicit theistic trappings, even though
Magic, from Ficino to Campanella, London: The War-
burg Institute, 1958 ¢ idem, Unclean Spirits, London: the notion of prisca theologia [> Tradition] on
Scholars Press, 1981 # C. Webster, From Paracelsus to which it had originally been founded had been
Newton: Magic and the Making of Modern Science, under attack since the 16th and increasingly the
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982 ¢@ P. 17th century.
Zambelli, L’ambigua natura della magia, Milan: Il Sag- The notion of magic as “magia naturalis” based
giatore, 1991.
strictly on the working of secondary causes — which
had emerged in the high middle ages and had been
JEAN-PIERRE BRACH
given a high profile by Renaissance defenders of
magic, not least in view of the necessity to legi-
Magic V: 18th-20th Century timize the practice as non-demonic (see below) -
had evolved during the 17th century into increas-
t. THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND MAGIC ingly “naturalist” directions, so that the distinction
2. STRATEGIES OF LEGITIMATION AND between magic and science could at times become
THE SECULARIZATION OF MAGIC quite hazy. This notion is recognized by the Ency-
3. MAGIc AS AN ENCHANTED clopédie as well, as ‘a somewhat more profound
WORLDVIEW 4. MaGic As ANCIENT study of nature, and of the admirable secrets dis-
TRADITION, AS SCIENCE, AND AS covered there’. Natural magic is praised as having
KNOWLEDGE 5. RITUAL MAGIC AND been highly advantageous to humanity, as wit-
PSYCHOLOGIZATION 6. ATTEMPTS AT nessed by many examples in physics, astronomy,
RE-ENCHANTMENT medicine, agriculture, navigation, mechanics, even
eloquence; and it seems to be associated mostly
1. THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND with mechanical “marvels” produced by natural
MaGICc means. But the conflict between traditional philo-
The 18th century inherited a variety of tradi- sophical and cosmological frameworks, on the one
tional notions concerning magic; but to a large hand, and those of the new science and rational

--- Page 163 ---
739 MAGIC V: 18TH-2OTH CENTURY
philosophies, on the other, is evident in the fact that distinguished above (magic as « “ancient wisdom”,
large parts of magia naturalis are transferred in the as an applied philosophy of nature, and as an art
Encyclopédie article to a third, negative category based upon contact with intermediary beings) goes
called “supernatural magic”. The result of igno- back to medieval times, flows into the 18th century,
rance and a lack of philosophy, it is nothing but a and has continued to the present day. However,
‘confused mass of principles that are obscure, defenders and practitioners of magic in pre- and
uncertain and undemonstrated, and of largely arbi- post-Enlightenment periods operated under very
trary and puerile practices, the inefficacy of which different social and cultural conditions, with far-
follows from the very nature of things’. A primary reaching implications for how they came to under-
example is > Agrippa’s celestial magic, based upon stand magic.
the ‘ridiculous system’ of > astrology. Such tradi- Renaissance defenders of magic were forced to
tional notions of natural magic, too, have had an try and legitimate their beliefs and practices by con-
interesting development from the 18th century to vincing not only real and potential critics, but them-
the present, in the context of new kinds of occult selves as well, that magic — or at least their magic —
philosophy that rejected the worldviews suggested worked on the basis of natural laws and principles
by mainstream science as too limited, but saw (> correspondences, sympathies and antipathies,
magic as a “higher science” based upon knowledge signatures, occult qualities in nature etc.), and did
of the “occult forces”. not rely on the help of demons. To do so was
And finally, there is the traditional notion of extremely difficult — in fact, it was impossible. The
magic as based upon contact with intelligent very nature of their underlying cosmologies tended
beings, notably demons or angels. This one like- to assign a certain degree of personal agency to e.g.
wise survived into the 18th century and on through the stars and planets, which could therefore be sus-
the roth and 2oth, but increasingly divorced from pected by critics of being demons in disguise;
Christian contexts. The Encyclopédie discusses it demons, of course, were notorious for deceiving
with reference to Agrippa’s “ceremonial magic”, human beings by appearing as angels of light, so
described as the most odious of all the vain that any reference to the assistance of divine angels
sciences. This detestable practice consists in evoca- was a dangerous strategy that might backfire any
tions of demons, pacts with infernal spirits, pre- moment; the very notion of magic as the religious
tended procedures for harming one’s enemies and wisdom of the ancients did not sit very well, to say
the production of evil and malicious effects; and it the least, with the concept of a religiously neutral
falls into several subcategories, including kabbalah magia naturalis; and finally, the notion of magic as
[> Jewish Influences], sorcery, incantations, necro- the “ancient worship of the gods” brought up the
mancy, discovery of hidden treasures and great obvious question whether those pagan gods wor-
secrets, divination [> Divinatory arts], the gift of shiped by e.g. Zoroaster or Hermes Trismegistus
prophecy, healing by mysterious practices, and had not in fact been demons as well.
participation in the witch’s sabbath. Fortunately, Defenders and practitioners of magic in pre-
Philosophy has now finally opened the eyes of Enlightenment periods were operating, in short, in
humanity about ‘these humiliating chimaeras’ of a religious context where the existence and active
superstition. Such typical Enlightenment rhetoric agency of non-human intermediary beings was
did not succeed, however, in deterring quite some generally accepted by all parties. This situation
contemporaries and their successors from engaging changed as a result of the “disenchantment of the
in such practices, and developing worldviews world” since the 18th century. If contemporary
devised to accomodate > “intermediary beings” magicians are sometimes still accused of contact
together with new scientific (notably psychologi- with demonic beings, the criticism comes from
cal) perspectives. evangelical or fundamentalist Christians who have
inherited traditional perceptions of magic as pagan
2. STRATEGIES OF LEGITIMATION worship and idolatry; but although magicians may
AND THE SECULARIZATION OF be forced to defend themselves against attacks
MAGIC from this side, this no longer requires them to legi-
The article in the Encyclopédie (which defines timate their practice in terms of a worldview of
“magic” as an ‘occult science or art that teaches generally accepted claims. This is different when it
how to do things that seem beyond human power’) comes to suspicions of criminal activity (notably
may be seen as a touchstone for analyzing the com- ritual abuse) linked to popular confusions between
plex destiny of magic since the Enlightenment. The magic and ~> satanism (Hanegraaff 1995); but
uneasy cohabitation, fraught with confusion and although such associations have their historical
conflict, between the three main notions of magic basis in early modern notions of ~ witchcraft as

--- Page 164 ---
MAGIC V: 18TH—2ZOTH CENTURY 740
based upon a combination of magic and the wor- affect the credibility of magic. As observed by
ship of (really existing) demonic beings, magicians Luhrmann (1989, 276), the purpose of the concept
now merely have to legitimate their practices as ‘lies in keeping unhappy bedfellows apart’. The dis-
not including criminal acts — whether or not they sipation of mystery in the “disenchanted” reality of
believe to be in contact with “higher beings”, and everyday life, where the imagination has no power,
whether those beings are angels or demons, is not a is thus compensated for by a separate magical
concern of any court of law. world of the reified imagination, where the rules of
In either case, magicians have to legitimate them- science and rationality do not apply. This makes it
selves as non-demonic or as non-criminal only if possible for modern and contemporary magicians
and when they happen to find themselves under to “live in two worlds”: they can function like any
accusation. Far more crucial, however, is how they other well-adapted citizen within the disenchanted
legitimate the very practice of magic to themselves: reality of everyday life, ruled by canons of science
for this is something that no modern or contempo- and logic, but in their private lives they partake in
rary magician can avoid doing, and it is in this an additional enchanted reality, ruled by the very
respect that magicians find themselves in a position different logic of ritual and the imagination. This
structurally similar to that of their early modern compensatory function is somewhat similar to the
predecessors. Renaissance magi like Ficino or “escape” offered by the creation of “imaginary
Agrippa were Christians who believed in the meta- worlds” in e.g. contemporary virtual reality and
physical existence of evil; contemporary magicians, roleplaying games; but contrary to the latter, it is
in contrast, are living in a secular society and tend taken with full seriousness as a religious world-
to believe in science and psychology. This latter si- view.
tuation is the result of gradual and complex histor- The transformation of magic since the 18th cen-
ical and social processes that have their roots tury — inevitable for adherents and practitioners in
already in early modernity and carried on far into order to preserve the legitimacy of magical practice
the r9th and 2oth centuries; but although sharp in the context of new, secularized realities — can be
dividing lines do not exist in history, it is certainly traced on the level of theory as well as practice. In
in the period that saw the Enlightenment and the a pre-Enlightenment context where the world was
French revolution that the balance began to shift believed to have been created by God, symbolic
decisively from an earlier culture of “accepted correspondences and signatures were seen as objec-
claims” to a new one. tively present signs that could be deciphered by
The strategies of legitimation by means of which man so as to discover their magical uses; in post-
contemporary magicans “make sense” of magic Enlightenment contexts predicated on an auto-
in a disenchanted world have been analyzed nomous rather than divinely created natural world,
exhaustively in a groundbreaking study by Tanya and particularly under the influence of modern psy-
Luhrmann (1989; cf. Hanegraaff 2003, 369-371), chology, correspondences have come to be seen in
culminating in her theory of “interpretive drift”, the 2oth century as conventional and individual-
which explains what happens during the process of ized tools for training the creative imagination.
being trained as a specialist in occultist magic. Cru- Likewise, concepts of spiritus as intermediary
cial to modern and contemporary strategies for the between the mortal body and the immortal soul
legitimation of magic is the concept of a separate- (and therefore not material; see e.g. Ficino or
but-connected “magical plane”, seen as parallel to Agrippa) have made place for concepts of “subtle
the mundane plane of every-day existence but matter” intermediary between psyche and matter.
existing on a different level of reality, and that can And although magicians believe that it can have
be accessed by means of the > imagination. On this real effects in the world, magic has been interpreted
plane, the things of the imagination are believed to increasingly as a series of psychological techniques
be as real as tables and chairs are real in the every- for learning how to use the hidden forces of the
day world. Somewhat similar to the relation psyche and exalting individual consciousness to
between a computer programming language and (ideally) a level of god-like omnipotence.
the texts or pictures that it conjures on the screen,
magicians believe that by “working” on the level of 3. MAaGiIc As AN ENCHANTED
the imagination, it is possible to influence events in WORLDVIEW
the everyday world. The crucial point here is that Tracing the history of magic from the 18th cen-
processes of secularization and disenchantment, tury to the present is considerably complicated by
although real on the mundane plane, simply have problems of terminology. In pre-Enlightenment
no bearing on the magical plane, and hence do not contexts the term magic was still understood rela-

--- Page 165 ---
741 MAGIC V: 18TH-2OTH CENTURY
tively clearly as referring to either one of the three dations are now under decisive attack. The “form
categories distinguished above (or combinations of of thought” on which these worldviews were based
them); but in the context — essentially created by has been famously defined by Antoine Faivre in
the Enlightenment in the wake of the scientific rev- terms that are all-revealing in this respect: corre-
olution — of an increasing polarization between spondences, living nature, imagination/mediations,
“religion” and “science”, it has progressively be- and transmutation (Faivre 1994, 10-15). The first
come a mere label for a conceptual wastebasket three of these in particular (arguably even the
filled with anything that did not seem to fit those fourth one) all stand for the very things that were
alternatives (e.g. while natural magic might be seen logically incompatible with the new scientific
as closer to science, it was not “real” science but perspectives, which replaced non-causal corre-
something tainted with superstition; demonic wor- spondences by instrumental causality, an organic
ship was closer to religion, but it was “false” reli- worldview by a mechanistic one, and the neopla-
gion; and from the perspective of scientific tonic multi-leveled cosmos by one that should be
progress, ancient wisdom could only be an out- reducible to only matter in motion.
dated and superseded pseudo-wisdom). In other This does not mean that an overview of “magic”
words, “magic” has come to be conflated with from the 18th century to the present is synonymous
equally vaguely used concepts such as e.g. “the with an overview of Western esotericism in that
occult” (resp. “occultism”, “occult science”), period. For although “magic” has become largely
“superstition”, “mysticism”, “esotericism”, “the equivalent to such an enchanted worldview in the
irrational”, “primitive thought” (cf. “fetishism”, rhetoric of many esoteric currents (and their critics)
“idolatry”), and so on. since the Enlightenment, frequently these currents
To further complicate matters, this was done not in fact no longer exemplify the worldviews they
only by the detractors of magic, but by defenders as purport to defend. The profoundest irony of the
well. Thus, for example, > Georg von Welling’s history of Western esotericism is that its r9th and
famous Opus mago-cabbalisticum et theosophi- 2oth-century representatives are largely so deeply
cum (first ed. 1719) has a theosophical content influenced by the very worldviews to which they
[> Christian Theosophy] but contains nothing object, that what they present as enchanted alter-
about magic or kabbalah; and the term magic natives turn out to be in fact products of the secu-
became quite prominent in the context of pre- larization process.
Romantic and Romantic ~ Naturphilosophie, The kind of “holistic” worldview consistently
where it came to stand for theosophical world- based on correspondences, living nature and imag-
views based upon ~ animal magnetism and the ination/mediations did flourish, however, in pre-
“theology of electricity” (see e.g. > O6etinger’s Romantic theosophical and illuminist currents (see
Magia Naturalis [1765], discussed in Faivre 1996, notably Viatte 1979) and is basic to the very phe-
181-217). We are dealing here with conscious and nomenon of ~ Romanticism as such (see Hane-
deliberate reactions against what has rightly been graaff 1998). It is explicitly referred to as “magic”
called the “disenchantment of the world” under by e.g. > Justinus Kerner (see notably his journal
the impact of the rise of materialist and mechanis- Magikon) and > Novalis, with his concept of
tic worldviews: “magic” now means the opinion “magical idealism”. As a worldview it continued to
that the world cannot be reduced to impersonal find its adherents after the Romantic period, but
processes of instrumental causality, because it is in although the term “magic” is relatively frequent in
fact held together by mysterious occult forces and such contexts, it could of course be referred to by
+ correspondences (the former being conceptual- other names as well. A notably example is > Carl
ized as an invisible medium between causes and Gustav Jung, whose concept of “synchronicity” ’
effects, resulting in what may be called “occult (explicitly presented as an alternative to a world-
causality”, whereas the latter does not strictly view of instrumental causality) is rooted in Western
require causality at all but may be seen in terms of esoteric and more specifically German Romantic/
a pre-established harmony). It should be noted that Naturphilosophical traditions, restated by him in
this is in fact a new meaning of “magic”, which psychological terminology.
could not possibly have existed in earlier periods,
precisely because it is elaborated in reaction to the 4. Macic as ANCIENT TRADITION,
“disenchantment of the world”. “Magic” now AS SCIENCE, AND AS KNOWLEDGE
comes to be used, innovatively, as a rhetorical term All magical currents since the 18th century have
that stands for the entirety of the traditional world- been influenced by the emergence of this new usage
views of Western ~ esotericism, whose very foun- of magic as a rhetorical concept equivalent to an

--- Page 166 ---
MAGIC V: 18TH-—2OTH CENTURY 742
“enchanted” worldview, and polemically opposed “occult philosophy” may be used as a synonym,
(whether explicitly or implicitly) against processes and the term “occult science” makes the point even
of disenchantment. This is perhaps most clear in more explicitly. A major representative of this
the case of those authors who continued the tradi- approach is, again, H.P. Blavatsky, whose vehe-
tional understanding of magic as “the wisdom of ment polemics against modern science are particu-
the ancients” and who, exemplifying the new his- larly prominent in the first volume (“science”) of
toricist focus typical of the r9th century, began to her Isis Unveiled of 1877.
present grand narratives of its development from Before moving on to the third traditional cate-
the earliest times to the present. To the extent that gory (contact with intermediary beings) it should
“magic” is understood as equivalent to an “cc “en- be added that, already in authors like Eliphas Lévi
chanted” worldview as such, such narratives tend (and increasingly in the magic of e.g. the > Her-
to be in fact attempts at writing the history of West- metic Order of the Golden Dawn, > Aleister Crow-
ern esotericism. It is not at all surprising, therefore, ley or ~ Dion Fortune) magic becomes associated
that one of the major representatives of this trend, with “kabbalah” [> Jewish Influences V] to such
+ Eliphas Lévi, was also one of the most important an extent that the two tend to be used as equiva-
early popularizers of the term “esotericism”. Lévi’s lents as well. As a result, magic can come to be
Histoire de la magie (1859) is in fact a history — associated to a large extent with the intellectual
confused and ill-founded though it may be —- of exercise of using “kabbalistic” tables of correspon-
Western esotericism as perceived by an author dences as a universal tool for interpreting things
deeply influenced by Romanticism. The case is and events in the world. This means that the magi-
much less clear with another major representa- cian is considered the person who “knows”: he per-
tive, > H.P. Blavatsky. In her works she certainly ceives the real pattern of hidden connections and
sees magic as equivalent to the “secret doctrine” the fundamental laws that underly reality, which of
that was already known to the ancients, but she course also makes it possible for him to act more
tends to prefer other labels, such as “occultism” effectively and apply these laws and connections
and “theosophy”, over that of “magic”. For the for achieving his ends.
second half of the r9th century and throughout the
2oth, it has remained the case that attempts at writ- 5. RITUAL MAGIC AND
ing the history of Western esotericism tend to freely PsYCHOLOGIZATION
use various terms from the “conceptual wastebas- Interestingly, as far as the three main traditional
ket” referred to earlier (e.g. histories of “magic and currents are concerned, the understanding of magic
the occult”, “mystery and magic”, “magic and as based on rituals that enable contact and com-
mysticism” and so on). munication with “intermediary beings” seems to
The traditional understanding of magic as an have emerged as the most prominent one in magi-
applied philosophy of nature (magia naturalis) was cal currents since the 18th century. Thus the
attractive, for obvious reasons, to authors with an theurgy practiced in illuminist sects like, notably, >
agenda of fighting against the dominance of the Martinés de Pasqually’s > Ordre des Elus Coéns
new philosophical and scientific worldviews. In was focused on “manifestations” of higher intelli-
these discussion as well, it was inevitable that gences, in the context of a worldview swarming
magic would come to be treated as largely equiva- with angelic and demonic beings; Eliphas Lévi
lent to Western esotericism, albeit with a strong famously claimed to have evoked the spirit of Apol-
emphasis on the “occult sciences”. One result was lonius of Tyana in London; and the system of the
that the latter were no longer seen as subdivided Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn has a crucial
into > astrology, -> alchemy and magic; rather, it backgrounds in the medieval grimoires studied
increasingly tends to be “magic” that is used as the by > MacGregor Mathers, resulting notably in his
umbrella term, so that alchemy and astrology editions of The Key of Solomon the King (Clavi-
become manifestations of magic (in fact: of an inte- cula Salomonis) (1889) and The Book ofthe Secret
grated magical or “enchanted” worldview, also Magic of Abra-Melin the Mage (1898). Although
referred to as “occult philosophy”). The rhetorical never part of the official teachings of the Golden
opposition “science or magic” has remained an Dawn, they have exerted a very strong influence on
extremely popular topos in alternative and esoteric the tradition, and the same goes for the “Enochian
literature throughout the r9th and 2oth centuries: magic” based upon > John Dee’s conjurations of
the popular quest for a unification of science and angels. All these are examples of ritual magic: a
religion often results in “magic” being presented current that flourished already in the middle ages
as the synthesis between both. Again, the term (see > Magic III) and was continued into the

--- Page 167 ---
743 MAGIC V: 18TH-20TH CENTURY
Renaissance by e.g. > Trithemius, Agrippa, and ual magic. An esoteric interest in, indeed worship
Dee. We are dealing here not with hostile percep- of, the male and female “generative powers” can be
tions of magic as demon-worship, but with texts traced back as far as the 18th century (Godwin
and authors who are themselves involved in, or at 1994), and led various occultist authors — notably
least are positive about, ritual invocations of inter- > P.B. Randolph - to explore the connections
mediary beings within a private religious setting. between sex and spirituality. An understanding of
If one asks oneself why it is that the members of magic as based on working with “sexual energies”
the Golden Dawn and similar magical orders put so (often referring, with or without justification, to
much time and effort in their elaborate rituals and tantric influences) became basic to e.g. Theodor
initiations, one explanation certainly has to do Reuss and ~ Aleister Crowley, their ~ Ordo
with the psychological satisfaction provided by rit- Templi Orientis, and offshoots such as the > Fra-
ual as such. While advancing from one degree to ternitas Saturni. Likewise it is important in Italian
the next, the adept is introduced to new and pro- magical circles, with authors such as > Kremmerz
gressively “deeper” knowledge (the initiations re- or Evola (The Metaphysics of Sex, 1958).
quire much study of various occult symbolical
systems), and can interpret this process as marking 6. ATTEMPTS AT RE-ENCHANTMENT
his own inner, spiritual development towards a The psychologization of magic as a practice of
superior gnosis. In fact, the single most important spiritual development is likewise central to how it
innovation in magic since the late r9th century is its functions within the rapidly growing cultic milieu
increasing understanding as, essentially, a series of referred to as ~ Neopaganism, itself heavily
spiritual techniques for “self-development”. This influenced by ritual magic in the Golden Dawn tra-
phenomenon is inseparable from the emergence of dition (understood here as including influential
psychology (academic as well as popular) during authors such as Crowley and Fortune), and inter-
the same period: the new interpretation of magic acting or overlapping in a complex way with the >
in terms of spiritual self-development inevitably New Age movement. The psychologization of ritual
turned magic into an applied psychology. This is magic as a tool for spiritual self-development is
demonstrated most clearly by how the invocation prominently visible here, but additional character-
of intermediary beings, traditionally central to rit- istics give it a special place in the development of
ual magic, has come to be interpreted. Mathers’ magic since the Enlightenment. Different from the
edition of the Abra-Melin rituals highlight the ritual magic in the Golden Dawn tradition, neopa-
importance of the “knowledge and conversation of gan magic is a very strong example of what was
the Holy Guardian Angel” as a major goal of ritual highlighted above as a new development since the
praxis; but already in the early decades of the zoth 18th century: the understanding of magic as equiv-
century, and possibly earlier, many magicians no alent with an “enchanted worldview”, defined by
longer understood this Holy Guardian Angel as an its very opposition to the disenchanted world
independent metaphysical entity but, rather, as the implied by mainstream science. Neopaganism is
operator’s own “higher self”. To be sure, this inter- grounded in a Romantic Naturphilosophie, es-
pretation is contested, with e.g. Aleister Crowley pousing a holistic worldview of correspondences,
reverting to a more traditional perspective later in organicism and “many levels of reality”. But under
his career; but there can be no doubt that for a large the impact of popular psychology, neopagans tend
part — probably the majority — of modern magi- to take a very pragmatic attitude towards the ques-
cians, the goal of magic is personal spiritual devel- tion of whether those levels, and the “entities”
opment. (gods, goddesses, angels etc.) by which they are
The same, we should add, can be said — although inhabited, exist only in the mind or “in reality”. In
in a different context and starting from different line with assumptions typical of New Age thinking
foundations — about another, somewhat less widely generally, it is doubted whether such dualisms are
influential but significant current of modern magic: helpful at all: if mind and matter are intimately
the one that is linked to the name of > Julius Evola interrelated, it becomes difficult and perhaps point-
(see Hakl 2001). Evola and this “Gruppo di Ur” less to distinguish the invocation of “higher beings”
are important for modern magic not only for their from exploring the contents of the psyche (whether
Introduzione alla Magia quale Scienza dell’lo personal or collective). Such opinions illustrate, per-
(orig. 1927-1929, published in 1955 and 1971), haps clearer than anything else, the gulf that yawns
but also for their involvement in yet another signi- between ancient, medieval and early modern
ficant 19th/20oth century innovation, likewise notions of magic, on the one hand, and their mod-
focused on “personal spiritual development”: sex- ern and contemporary counterparts, on the other.

--- Page 168 ---
MAGIC V: 18TH-20TH CENTURY 744
Lit: Margot Adler, Drawing Down the Moon: citations of forbidden texts. They re-emerged in the
Witches, Druids, Goddess-Worshippers, and other Renaissance when the most important manual of
Pagans in American Today (1979), rev. ed. Boston: medieval magic, Picatrix, hitherto almost un-
Beacon Press, 1986 # Constantin Bila, La croyance a la
known, resumed circulation. In general, magical
magie au XVIII® siecle en France dans les contes,
instruments may be classified under two types:
romans @& traités, Paris, 1925 # Hans Thomas Hakl,
“Die Magie bei Julius Evola und Ihre Philosophischen (z) As tools for operations such as spells, invoca-
Voraussetzungen”, in: Richard Caron, Joscelyn God- tions, and divinations; (2) As objects for protec-
win, Wouter J. Hanegraaff & Jean-Louis Vieillard- tion, such as sigils and > amulets.
Baron (eds.), Esotérisme, gnoses @& imaginaire Tools for magical operations. Since Antiquity, a
symbolique: Mélanges offerts a Antoine Faivre, Lou- magical instrument has often been associated in its
vain: Peeters, 2001, 415-436 ¢ Wouter J. Hanegraaff,
application with the presence of herbal concoctions,
“From the Devil’s Gateway to the Goddes within: The
endowed with particular powers which have been Image of the Witch in Neopaganism”, in: Ria Klop-
penborg & Wouter J. Hanegraaff (eds.), Female Stereo- revealed by a god or a magus. Circe was considered
types in Religious Traditions, Leiden, New York, Koln: to be the initiator of this magical practice: she
E.J. Brill, 1995, 213-242 # idem, New Age Religion touched some of Ulysses’ companions with her
and Western Culture: Esotericism in the Mirror ofSec- magic wand, whilst he defended himself from her
ular Thought, Leiden, New York, Koln: E.J. Brill,
thanks to an antidote made from a magic herb,
1996/Albany: SUNY Press, 1998, chs. 4 and 15 ¢
secretly revealed to him by a hidden god. The magic
idem, “Romanticism and the Esoteric Connection”, in:
Roelof van den Broek & Wouter J. Hanegraaff, Gnosis wand is considered the instrument of command par
and Hermeticism from Antiquity to Modern Times, excellence, and the methods of its construction are
Albany: SUNY Press, 1998, 237-268 # idem, “How always minutely described. Usually it is made from a
Magic survived the Disenchantment of the World”, young hazel tree, whose branch has been cut with a
Religion 33:4 (2003), 357-380 @ Ronald Hutton, The single stroke while murmuring a formula of invoca-
Triumph of the Moon: A History of Modern Pagan
tion. Other tools for making magical invocations are
Witchcraft, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 ¢
the dagger, associated with the planet Mars because Massimo Introvigne, I/ Capello del Mago: I nuovi
movimenti magici, dallo spiritismo al satanismo, Car- it is an offensive weapon, and the sword, also associ-
nago: Sugarco Edizioni, 1990 « Francis King, Ritual ated with Mars but considered a defensive weapon.
Magic in England: 1887 to the Present Day, London: In order to function, these instruments must be con-
Neville Spearman, 1970 ¢ idem, Sexuality, Magic and secrated according to various rituals which confer
Perversion (1971), repr. London: Neville Spearman, on them the charge of energy necessary for accom-
2002 James R. Lewis (ed.), Magical Religion and
plishing the magical operations decreed by the
Modern Witchcraft, Albany: SUNY Press, 1996 ¢
T.M. Luhrmann, Persuasions of the Witch’s Craft: magus. The use of a magical instrument therefore
Ritual Magic in Contemporary England, Cambridge does not take place in isolation, but is connected
Ma.: Harvard University Press 1989 # Jean-Baptiste with ceremonies, formulae, potions and unguents
Martin & Francois Laplantine (eds.), Le défi magique, taken from animals or even from human bones,
2 vols., Lyon: Presses Universitaires de Lyon, 1994 ¢ together with invocations and litanies. The first
Stoddard Martin, Orthodox Heresy: The Rise of
description of magical objects is found in Apuleius’s
“Magic” as Religion and its Relation to Literature,
Golden Ass (also known as Metamorphoses), Il, New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1989 # Auguste Viatte,
Les sources occultes du Romantisme: Illuminisme, 21-28, when Pamphile transforms herself into an
Théosophie 1770-1820 (oxig. 1927), 2 vols., Paris: owl. There is a small box containing jars of ointment
Honoré Champion, 1979. with which Pamphile smears her entire body, and
an oil lamp with which she speaks secretly, by means
WOUTER J. HANEGRAAFF of which the spell works.
In the tradition of Egyptian magic there are many
Magical Instruments indications of magical practices with relevant
objects, especially to do with love-spells: laurel
There is little evidence of magical instruments branches for burning, and red wool wound around
from the Middle Ages, owing to the prohibitions by the container of the love-potion or philter are the
the doctrinal authorities of those centuries. The tes- principal ingredients. A detailed description of
timonies are indirect and derive from works of them can be found in the Idylls or The Enchanters
Greco-Roman paganism and medieval Arab cul- (2) of Theocritus. The philters must be prepared
ture that passed sporadically into medieval Latin while the full moon is shining and under the pro-
literature. Thus the available sources are prepon- tection of Hecate; one must repeat nine four-line
derantly classical and Renaissance; in the Middle strophes, sighing (sussurrus magicus) three times,
Ages they were obscured, known only through and one must whirl a bull-roarer of wood or metal,

--- Page 169 ---
74S MAGICAL INSTRUMENTS
whose low vibrations protect the magus’ opera- oping the themes of Picatrix’s medieval Hermetic
tion. Certain animals are also used in love-magic, magic.
such as the salamander, killed in the instant of cop- Both stones and plants are considered magical
ulation, whose tail, worn as an amulet, is meant to instruments, following the different classes that
favour erotic activities. depend on various planetary and astral influences.
Beside the salamander, there are certain animals, Plants and stones are primarily distinguished
particularly the fish and the cat, whose parts or according to the seven planets: sun: diamond, yel-
whole bodies were considered instruments for low sapphire, gold, topaz; moon: crystal, selenite,
powerful spells. A magical ointment that was very silver; Mars: ruby, garnet, hematite, iron, mag-
effective in love-magic was obtained from fish netite; Venus: emerald, beryl, chrysolite, copper,
(Apuleius was accused of its use: see his Apologia, lapis lazuli; Jupiter: blue sapphire, chalcedony, tin;
Ill, 25-27). Cats, represented as living or dead, Saturn: amethyst, pearl, onyx, obsidian, lead; Mer-
were considered as very powerful instruments for cury: opal, orange sapphire, coral, electrum. A
obtaining the object of one’s desire, as in certain magical use is attributed to every stone. The dia-
Egyptian magical practices (see the Greek Magical mond, for example, is considered a protection
Papyri, 3, 1-25), or the spell described in Oscar against the evil eye, and said to favor lucid dreams
Wilde’s The Picture of Dorian Gray. The belief in and purify the thoughts.
cats’ fear of water probably derives from the tradi- The magic mirror is of the highest importance in
tion, described in the Magical Papyri (loc. cit.), of the whole magical tradition. It is used for spells,
drowning a cat in water: in that moment Osiris, the evocations of spirits of the dead, invocations of
god with a cat’s face, must be invoked to realize the demons and necromantic operations — the latter
magus’ desire. understood as divinatory operations for foretelling
These magical techniques were transmitted the future by means of communication with the
through the ages in the practices of love-magic and dead via the mirror. In the Picatrix, necromancy has
in death-spells (facturae, from facturus, that which a broader significance than solely the evocation of
will happen in the future), described in certain the dead: it is considered to be the noblest kind of
medieval treatises or compilations that are still wisdom, and consists of a great variety of magical
unpublished and are known as Experimenta. These operations, both terrestrial and celestial, aimed at
spells are performed through various operations. uniting the operator with the universal divine spirit
For love-spells it is most important to make a sim- (I, Il, p.5). The evocation of the dead by means of
ulacrum (a wax or clay doll, or a statuette repre- the mirror is only one particular technique of necro-
senting the subject to be compelled or destroyed), mancy (the name of which derives from necros,
in which should be placed a little heart of copper, understood on the one hand as “dead”, and on the
bound with a metal thread. The various manuals other as something “black” and obscure).
of love-magic describe the other paraphernalia All the tools mentioned hitherto are absolutely
needed for the spell, such as magical herbs corre- indispensable for necromancy. However, according
sponding to the astrological sign of the subject and to the Picatrix, the mirror is the primary magical
object, a red candle, and so on. Picatrix, the most instrument by virtue of its special nature: it is par-
important magical grimoire of the r1th-13th cen- ticularly disposed to receiving (reflecting) the mag-
turies, states that the chains of love are efficacious ical operation, of which it is the root (radix) (I, IV,
under the influence of special astrological images 32, p.14). In particular, it is a magical attribute of
or figures, especially the moon in good aspect with the planetary divinities, such as the two luminaries
Venus. The good or bad configurations, invoked sun and moon, which are imprisoned in the mirror
through formulae of spells and incense, are consid- without impoverishment of their light (III, VII,
ered most potent instruments in love-magic. p. 113). Burning-glasses also possess special
Astrological images, characters engraved on peb- virtues: they can repel storms and dominate winds,
bles, crystals, gems, and precious stones are essen- men, and demons, and have special powers in the
tial tools in the necromantic magic described in pharmacopia (Picatrix, IV, 7). More specifically,
Picatrix and developed over later centuries by > the mirror is not only a tool of magical operations,
Agrippa, > Paracelsus, and > Trithemius, right up but also of real divination, which may be natural,
to the present day. Agrippa in De occulta philo- i.e., employing natural mirrors such as water (used
sophia (I, 40, 159) repeats these practices from in Antiquity in vases and basins) which is stared at
Picatrix and calls them ligamenta. He also gives an by a child in trance, or air (clouds, vapors). Metals,
interesting classification of the tools by which the too, can be used as divinatory mirrors, as in
spell of ligamentum or vinculum is achieved, devel- the bronze, gold, or silver shields of warriors. The

--- Page 170 ---
MAGICAL INSTRUMENTS 746
sun itself can even serve as a mirror, while the One magical instrument, finally, used through
reflected moon represents the most excellent of the centuries up to the present day is the horn of
celestial mirrors. coral or some other material: in Italy it is thought
In the work of > Peter of Abano called Lucida- to protect against the evil eye. In the Middle Ages
tor dubitabilium astronomiae is found a famous there was talk. of the extraordinary power of the
classification of divination per specula, which Peter ivory horn belonging to the knight Roland, whose
knew through the transmission of the Antiquitates sound caused avalanches in the mountains and
rerum humanarum et divinarum by Varro (116- shook the earth like an earthquake. Some minia-
127 CE). In the first chapter he condemns all the tures of the 13th century testify to this tradition.
magical arts and books on magic known in his Finally, all the manuals of magic (grimoires),
time. Mirrors come under the practice that he whether black or white, may be considered abso-
classifies as “exterior divination” or aeromancy. lutely extraordinary magical instruments.
Such operations can be done during the night, Objects for Protection. The magical objects used
using any type of mirror. This magical practice was for protection include seals, amulets, talismans,
condemned in the notorious Bull Super illius spec- and all the drawings, images, engraved figures and
ula of John XXII (Avignon, 1326-1327), in which characters which are described in great detail in the
all operations and evocations per specula are con- occult manuals of magic (grimoires).
demned. The mirror is also an instrument for evok- The magic circle or Circle of the Art has the func-
ing the dead, the living, angels, or demons, by tion of delimiting a “closed space”, protecting it
means of formulae and ceremonies during which from external influences and rendering the magus
compound substances are burned. In Picatrix (VI, invulnerable within the circle. Among specific
VII) there is a useful recipe for constructing the instruments are the rings and pentacles that derive
magic mirror, which must be of gold or silver and from medieval Arab magic: they are figures traced
decorated by engravings of the figures of the seven after the numerical value of the Arabic letters, so as
planets, the twelve signs of the zodiac, and the to form squares that are influenced by the universal
names of certain special constellations. This magic force that protects the person for whom the penta-
mirror confers on whoever uses it immense powers cle has been designed. These are considered magi-
of command. A different recipe for making a mir- cal tools of protection, as are all amulets, which are
ror of evocation appears in the Grimorium verum, protective objects that are very easy to prepare.
a Hebrew manual of magic, which teaches how to They may be divided into three types, following the
make the mirror of Solomon, through which it material from which they are made: animal, veg-
is possible to evoke the angel Anael during the etable, and mineral. They often have the form of
new moon: he will appear in the guise of a young animals and are colored, perfumed, and prepared
child. > Michael Scot (12th-13th century) also under a particular astral configuration which
speaks of the evocation of the demon Floraget in influences the operation. They are considered less
the mirror. And Luther believed in the existence of efficacious than talismans, because they do not con-
the mirror of Mercury, which supposedly made cer- tain occult forces, but work through analogy only.
tain false images appear, all works of the Devil. A detailed description of talismanic figures is found
Another type of divination and magical evoca- in Picatrix (IV), which provides a description of the
tion, connected with the optical phenomena of mir- formulae and methods of preparation of mixed
rors, is crystallomancy. This is a very ancient substances to be burned, according to the seven dif-
practice in which originally a special stone was ferent images corresponding to the seven planets.
used: the beryl, transparent and in different colors, The talisman derives its name perhaps from the
from bright green to bright blue, yellow, and white. Arabic tilasm, “magical image”, or from the Greek
One variety of transparent green beryl is the emer- telesma, “religious ritual”. Its basis is the belief in
ald. In modern times, these stones have been the operative, magical power of the talismanic
replaced by crystal balls made from transparent object, which derives from the idea of the analogi-
glass. > Nicholas of Cusa writes of the powers of cal process of correspondence between the talis-
the beryl in De berillo. He who looks through it, man and the planets. In this sense, all the sigils that
says Nicholas, will succeed in seeing invisible real- imprison the spirits of the corresponding planets
ities with the naked eye, and all the arcane and may be considered talismans. A still unpublished
secret mysteries. In ancient times, divination by text of medieval talismanic magic is the Liber pres-
means of mirrors was considered a type of oracular tigiorum Abel, translated into Latin in the rath
activity, through which the god or the demon century perhaps by Adelard of Bath or > Robert of
spoke. Chester. In the Middle Ages some treatises called

--- Page 171 ---
747 MAIER
De sigillis were compiled, attributed to > Arnau de Padua: Programma, 1992 @ G. Peucer, Commenta-
Vilanova, which deal with sigils with special thera- rium de principiis divinationum generibus, Wirttem-
peutic properties, including those of the twelve berg, 1553 ¢ Picatrix, ed. D. Pingree, London:
Warburg Institute, 1986 ¢ Tabula smaragdina, ed.
zodiac signs, of which Leo and Scorpio were much
J. Ruska, Heidelberg: Winter, 1926 ¢ Thaddeus of
favored in the Middle Ages (from > Albertus Mag- Parma, “Mathematica improprie dicta sive prohibita:
nus and > Peter of Abano to > Marsilio Ficino). Manthica”, in: G. Federici Vescovini, Appendix “La
Invocations of saints and verses of the Psalms are classification des mathematiques d’apres le Prologue de
inscribed on these seals, in the metal corresponding lExpositio super theorica planetarum de l’averroiste
to the sign (e.g., in gold for the sign of Leo), and Thaddée de Parme (Bologne, 1318)”, in: J. Hamesse
while they are being made, special invocations must (ed.), Manuels, Programmes de cours, Louvain-la-
Neuve: Fidem, 1994.
be spoken (a typical instruction is e.g. ‘Arise O Lion
from the tribe of Judah and hear my judgment, O
Lit.: A. Buck (ed.), Die okkulten Wissenschften in
my God, in my cause; afterwards say the Psalm’),
der Renaissance, Wiesbaden, 1992 ¢ N. Cohn, Dé-
while e.g. on one side is incised “Thael Sanctus monolatrie et sorcellerie au moyen age, phantasmes
Iacobus”, on the other “David alleluia”, and in the et réalités, Paris: Payot, 1982 « T. Fahd, La divina-
center “Heloy Saday”. This particular description tion arabe, Leiden: Brill, 1966 # Claire Fanger (ed.),
refers to the seal of Leo (see description in Arnau Conjuring Spirits, Little Hampton, West Sussex,
1999 M. Introvigne, I/ cappello del mago, Milan:de Vilanova, Sigillum Leonis, London, Wellcome
SugarCo, 1990 @ R. Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle
Library, ms. 560), which is to be worn on the kid-
Ages, Cambridge, 1989 # R. Kieckhefer, Forbidden
neys and is supposed to protect one from renal ail- Rites, Little Hampton, West Sussex, 1999 ¢ P. Kraus,
ments, menstrual problems, all troubles of the Jabir ibn Hayyan: Contribution a Vhistoire des idées
stomach, shoulders and back, and fevers. One of scientifiques dans I’Islam, Paris: Les Belles Lettres,
the first works that demonstrates the belief in the 1986 G. Luck, Arcana mundi: Magia e occulto nel
medicinal-magical potency of these seals for wear- mondo greco e romano, Enlarged Italian version by
ing or hanging on one is De physicis ligaturis by C. Tartaglini, Milan: Fondazione Giorgio Valla, 1999
(first English ed., Baltimore, London: The Johns Hop-
Costa ben Luqua, translated by Arnau de Vilanova.
kins University Press, 1985) # S. Matton, La magie
In this type of treatise of Christian or Jewish magic, arabe traditionelle, Paris, 1977 ¢ Heinz Schott & Ilana
it was commonly supposed that the spirits of saints Zinguer (eds.), Paracelsus und seine internationale
were captured in the astrological sigils, thus render- Rezeption in der frithen Neuzeit, Leiden: Brill, 1999 ¢
ing these talismanic instruments effective. Qusta ibn Luqua, “Physical Ligatures and the Recog-
nition of the Placebo Effect”, in J. Wilcox & J. Riddle
Apuleius, Metamorphoseon Libri XI, ed. R. Helm, (eds.), Medieval Jewish Christian and Muslim Culture
Leipzig, 1968 (Latin text); Les métamorphoses, Encounters, Leiden, 1994, 1-52 F. Sezgin, Geschichte
Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1972 # Arnau de Vilanova des arabischen Schrifttums, Leiden: Brill, 1975-1978.
(Pseudo-?), Sigilla, ms. London, Wellcome Library m.
560 @ G. Bruno, De vinculis, in: Opera latina, Frank- GRAZIELLA FEDERICI VESCOVINI
furt, 1591 @ idem, De umbris idearum, critical ed. by
Rita Sturlese, Florence: Olschki, r991 ¢ Cornelius
Agrippa of Nettesheim De occulta philosophia libri Maier, Count Michael, * 1569 in the
tres, ed. V. Perrone Compagni, Leiden: Brill, 1992 vicinity of Kiel, | 1622 Magdeburg
P. de Loyer, Des spectres ou apparitions et visions
d esprit, anges et demons, Angers, 1586 # Grimorium
Verum, Memphis, 1517 # R. Halleux, J. Schamp, Alchemist and Rosicrucian apologist, named
Les lapidaires grecs, Paris, 1985 # Jean Faber, Liber Count Palatine (Pfalzgraf) by Emperor > Rudolf II
experimentorum de anulis, ms. Padua, Bibl. del Semi- (1552-1612) and appointed Medicus und Chymi-
nario, 235, 17th century ¢ Palladium spagiricum, cus von Haufs aus by Moritz “the Learned” of
Toulouse 1624 ¢ John XXII (Pope), “Super illius spec- Hessen-Kassel (1572-1632); known chiefly for his
ula”, in: J. Hansen, Ouellen und Untersuchungen zur
early baroque book of alchemical emblems, the
Geschichte des Hexenwahns und der Hexenverfolgun-
gen im Mittelalter, Bonn, 1901 ¢ Lucan, Pharsalia (De Atalanta Fugiens, and for his prominent position
bello civili libri decem), ed. Carolus Hosius, Leipzig: in the Rosicrucian affair [~ Rosicrucianism]. The
Teubner, 1905 @ M. Luther, Tischreden, Weimar, 1912, Lutheran Maier gained his Masters degree at
no. 5457 ¢ Michael Scot, Liber introductorius, ms. Frankfurt an der Oder in 1592 and his doctorate at
Munich, Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, lat. 10268 ¢ the University of Basel in 1596; he also underwent
Nicholas of Cusa, De beryllo, in: Opera omnia, Basel, medical training at the University of Padua, where
1565; Italian trans. by G. Federici Vescovini, Turin:
he acquired the title of Poet Laureate. An early
Utet, 1972, 634-687 # Paracelsus, De presagiis, Basel,
1569 Peter of Abano, Lucidator dubitabilium patron and inspiration for Maier’s pseudo-Egyp-
astrologiae (astronomiae), ed. G. Federici Vescovini, tianism appears to have been Heinrich Rantzau

--- Page 172 ---
MAIER 748
(1526-1598), Governor of Schleswig-Holstein. that was a cornerstone of his Work. The De Circulo
Following a long peregrinatio academica, Maier Physico, Quadrato (1616) deals with the hidden
first developed an interest in alchemy in 1599 bonds uniting God, the sun, gold and the human
whilst in K6nigsberg, where he witnessed the heal- heart, and discusses the means of extracting the
ing of a chronically ill man through the application medicinal kernel lying under the hard shell of gold,
of an English iatrochemical remedy. He completed whilst the Galenic principles of Maier’s physic are
his first alchemical experiment at Easter of 1604 in extensively illustrated in the Civitas Corporis
his hometown in Holstein; at some time in 1608 he Humani (1621) — a work whose exorbitant claims
moved to Prague, where he became personal physi- for the cure of various ills quasi in una hora testify
cian to Rudolf II and entered the hereditary peerage to Maier’s life-long difficulties with the securing of
on September 29, 1609. Prior to Rudolf’s usurpa- patronage. The finest example of Maier’s skills
tion in 1612 Maier left the imperial court and made with Latin verse composition are probably the
his way to England, where he became a close Cantilenae Intellectuales (1622); they also evince
acquaintance of Francis Anthony (1550-1623) and the author’s neo-Pythagorean sensibilities, as do
defended the Englishman’s “drinkable gold” in the fugues written by Maier for his Atalunta
print; at this time he also made translations of Fugiens (1617). This latter work of multimedia
alchemical tracts by Thomas Norton of Bristol and presents the reader with fifty copperplate emblems
the pseudonymous “Abbot Cremer of Westmin- from the engraver Matthias Merian, illustrating
ster”. According to > Elias Ashmole, Maier’s various alchemical axioms and accompanied by
entertainment in England ‘was too coarse for so short discourses and the aforementioned fugues; it
deserving a scholar’; in 1616 he returned to Ger- counts as the most innovative and beautiful expres-
many and attended a wealthy nobleman by the sion of pansophic alchemical thought from the
name of von Riedesel in the environs of Frankfurt German late Renaisance. In his Ulysses (1624), a
am Main. Despite earlier attempts to secure the short, posthumously published ethical tract, Maier
patronage of Moritz of Hessen-Kassel, Maier presents Homer’s hero as the image of the ideal
gained an extra-mural position at the Hessian man, unwavering in the face of misfortune and a
court only in mid-1618, and it seems this had been life spent in foreign lands.
revoked by 1621. Maier died on the return journey Maier’s involvement with the early Rosicrucian
to his native Holstein after some fourteen years’ phenomenon has been the subject of a great deal
absence, apparently from chronic illness. of unfounded speculation through the centuries.
The majority of Maier’s works were printed in Contrary to the thesis of Frances Yates (The Rosi-
the years following his return from England by the crucian Enlightenment, 1972) Maier’s first en-
Frankfurt publishers Lucas Jennis and Johann counter with the Rosicrucian manifestos was at the
Theodor de Bry; according to Maier’s testimony autumnal Frankfurt Book Fair of 1616; thus Maier
many were composed whilst the author was lying played no role in the construction of a “Rosicru-
ill with the quartan. Maier’s varied corpus displays cian” Anglo-Bohemian axis whilst in England. Nor
an admixture of late Renaissance humanist learn- was he on good terms with the English Rosicrucian
ing, pre-Paracelsian iatrochemical conceptions and apologist > Robert Fludd, with whom he has erro-
a heterodox Lutheran > mysticism; a pervasive neously been linked as the progenitor of a lineage
motif is his alchemical interpretation of the sym- leading from Rosicrucianism to English > Freema-
bolism of Egyptian and Greek mythology, which sonry. Perhaps the most prevalent myth involving
was definitively formulated in the Arcana Arcanis- Maier concerns his “Leipzig manuscript”, which —
sima (1614). Further elaboration on the prisca far from providing evidence for 16th century ori-
sapientia doctrine appeared in the work that is gins of the Gold- und Rosenkreuz — is in fact a
often considered to be Maier’s magnum opus, the rough draft for the author’s Arcana Arcanissima. >
Symbola Aureae Mensae (1617), which traces the Arthur Edward Waite’s suggestion in his Brother-
lineage of alchemical adepts from twelve nations. hood of the Rosy Cross (1924) that Maier entered
An elegant statement of Maier’s Hermetic natural the Rosicrucian Fraternity ‘ere he died’ stems from
philosophy is to be found in the Septimana Philo- certain remarks mischievously inserted by Lucas
sophica (1620); tendencies towards Reichspatrio- Jennis into his translation of the Colloquium
tismus and a militant Protestantism are present Rhodo-Stauroticum (1624), which state that Maier
above all in his Verum Inventum (1619); whilst the was ‘rewarded’ by the Brotherhood of the Rosy
early Hymnosophia (c. 1610) displays overtly Cross prior to his death. That Jennis was aware of
gnostic motifs and the alchemical solar mysticism the strictly virtual nature of the Fraternity is clear

--- Page 173 ---
749 MAISTRE
from his description of Maier as a Regni Christi Lit.: J.B. Craven, Count Michael Maier, Doctor of Phi-
frater, i.e. a Brother of the Kingdom of Christ. Like losophy and of Medicine, Alchemist, Rosicrucian,
other Rosicrucian apologists, Maier utilised the Mystic: Life and Writings, Kirkwall: William Pearce
frenzy of publishing activity provoked by the Rosi- and Son, 1910 ¢ Karin Figala and Ulrich Neumann,
“*Author cui Nomen Hermes Malavici’: New Light on
crucian manifestos as an arena for the furtherance the Bio-Bibliography of Michael Maier (1569-1622)”,
of his own worldview, influentially portraying the in: Piyo Rattansi and Antonio Clericuzio (eds.),
Brethren in his Silentium post Clamores (1617) and Alchemy and Chemistry in the 16th and 17th Cen-
Themis Aurea (1618) as pious investigators into turies, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994,
the secrets of alchemy and readers of divine signs in 121-148 # Hereward Tilton, The Quest for the
Nature. Thus for Maier the initials R.C. are “hiero- Phoenix: Spiritual Alchemy and Rosicrucianism in the
Work of Count Michael Maier (1569 -1622), Berlin:
glyphs” veiling the many levels of significance of
Walter de Gruyter, 2003.
the alchemical work. The perception of such signs,
or Insignia impressa, constitutes an act of gnosis:
HEREWARD TILTON
hence Maier proclaims in his Hymnosophia that
the phoenix may be seen beyond the land of Egypt,
provided that we look about with ‘the little eye of Maistre, Joseph de, * 1.4.1753
the soul’. Here he refers to a universal law of death Chambéry, + 26.2.1821 Turin
and resurrection, reflected not only in the processes
within the alchemical vessel and the cathartic Educated by the Jesuits, de Maistre became a
action of the mercurial medicine, but also in the tri- member of the Savoy Senate in 1787. After
als of earthly existence by which a finer spirit is dis- Napoleon’s invasion of Savoy, de Maistre went into
tilled. Maier’s “spiritual alchemy” achieved its exile in Switzerland. In 1803 he was appointed
greatest influence through the periodic re-publica- envoy to St. Petersburg by the King of Sardinia. He
tion of the Allegoria Bella, an alchemical allegory remained in Russia for fourteen years. Upon his
concerning his quest for the phoenix which origi- recall, he served as magistrate and minister of state
nally constituted the final chapter of the Symbola of the Sardinian Kingdom.
Aureae Mensae. The scholarship of Georges Goyau, Emile Der-
menghem, and Frangois Vermale in the 1910s to
Michael Maier, Atalanta Fugiens, hoc est, Emblemata 19308 established that the Savoyard Catholic Tra-
nova de secretis naturae chymica, Oppenheim: Johann ditionalist de Maistre belonged to Masonic lodges
Theodor de Bry, 1617; a helpful modern edition with
[> Freemasonry], maintained a life-long interest
extensive commentary and an English translation of the
in > Illuminism, and that esoteric themes are inte- discourses is to be found in: H.M.E. de Jong, Michael
Maier’s Atalanta Fugiens: Sources of an Alchemical gral to his thought.
Book of Emblems, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1969, York Beach: From 1774 to 1790 de Maistre belonged succes-
repr. Nicholas Hays, 2002; see also Joscelyn Godwin sively to two masonic obediences. He first joined
(ed.), Atalanta Fugiens: An Edition of the Fugues, the Chambéry lodge Saint-Jean des Trois Mortiers,
Emblems and Epigrams, Grand Rapids, Mi.: Phanes affiliated with the Grand Lodge of London. After
Press, 1989 ¢ Michael Maier, Symbola Aureae Mensae
five years he left the Trois Mortiers to join La
Duodecim Nationum, Frankfurt am Main: Lucas Jen-
nis, 1617; Graz Verlag produced a good facsimile edition Sincérité, where he ascended rapidly through the
of this work in 1972, and the Allegoria Bella appears in grades. La Sincérité was also a Chambéry lodge, but
English translation as “A Subtle Allegory concerning the it was under the patronage of the Rectified Scottish
Secrets of Alchemy”, in: The Hermetic Museum, Rite Masonry of Lyon, which, under the direction
Restored and Enlarged (Arthur Edward Waite, trans.), of > Jean-Baptiste Willermoz, was an esoteric
London: J. Elliott and Co., 1893, 199-233 # Michael
masonry whose grades and rituals drew on the
Maier, Cantilenae Intellectuales, in Triadas 9. distinctae,
theosophic teachings of > Martinés de Pasqually.
De Phoenice Redivivo, Rostock: Mauritii Saxonis,
1622; a limited edition of this work in English transla- De Maistre’s interest in esoteric masonry, and Illu-
tion appeared as Intellectual Cantilenae in Nine Triads minism in general, predates his entrance into La
upon the Resurrection of the Phoenix (Mike Dickman, Sincérité; two years before he had travelled to Lyon
trans.), Glasgow: Magnum Opus Hermetic Source- where he received, under the name Josephus a
works, 1997 @ Erik Leibenguth, Hermetische Poesie des Floribus, the rank of Chevalier in the Order of the
Frithbarock: Die ‘Cantilenae intellectuales’ Michael
Stricte Observance Templiére from Willermoz.
Maiers, Tiibingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag, 2002, offers
At La Sincérité, de Maistre associated himself
not only a fine German edition of the Cantilenae intel-
lectuales but also a detailed and insightful account of with those working for the regeneration of the tem-
Maier’s life and worldview. plar obedience. De Maistre expressed his ideas for

--- Page 174 ---
MAISTRE TSO
reform most fully in a document written in minism, which is set out in the private letters of the
response to the invitation, in preparation for the period and in dialogues X and XI of Les Soirées de
Convent of Wilhelmsbad, to comment on the state Saint-Pétersbourg. While he continued to insist
of masonry extended to the brotherhood by Duke that Illuminism, in relation to Catholicism, com-
Ferdinand of Brunswick, Grand Master of the promises the question of authority, he points out
Stricte Observance Templiére. In his Mémoire au that Illuminism works to overcome the disunion of
duc de Brunswick (1782), de Maistre argues that the Churches caused and perpetuated by Protes-
Masonry should drop its pretence of a chivalric tantism. He urges that Illuminism be seen as an
past and establish itself as a new Christian Order. agent of the unification of Christianity in all coun-
Devoted to a spiritual and mystical end, and gov- tries separated from Rome. De Maistre also makes
erned by inspired sages for whom the highest grade a point of distinguishing between Illuminisms.
will be reserved, Masonry should become an inter- While Illuminism can refer to ‘these guilty men
mediate power between Church and State, without in Germany who have dared in our time to con-
ever usurping the place of either one. De Maistre’s ceive and even to organize, by the most criminal
Mémoire was ignored at Wilhelmsbad. association, the frightful project of stamping out
De Maistre was always a practicing Catholic. In Christianity and sovereignty in Europe’ (the Illumi-
the years during which he belonged to the Trois naten of Bavaria), ‘the same name is given to the
Mortiers and La Sincérité, de Maistre was also a virtuous disciples of > Saint-Martin, who not only
member of two Christian brotherhoods: the Péni- profess Christianity, but work to raise themselves
tents Noirs and the Jesuit-directed Grande Congré- to the most sublime heights of this divine law’
gation Notre Dame de |’Assomption. De Maistre (Soirées, dialogue XI).
saw in the Illuminist doctrines of Rectified Scottish These same dialogues of Les Soirées de Saint-
Rite Masonry a providential counter-force to the Pétersbourg display the Illuminist themes retained,
rationalism and irreligion of the 18th century. He as de Maistre freely admitted, in his mature
understood esoteric initiation to be religious in thought. (1) The conviction that humanity is able
essence and an excellent means of deepening Chris- to lift the veil separating it from its Creator and, by
tianity. In considering that esoteric Masonry, far thereby discovering the providential order within
from opposing Catholicism, would be the agent of history, to clarify a little the mystery of the human
its revival, de Maistre was not unique. There was condition. (2) The interpretation of St. Paul’s
little conflict at this place and time between description of this world as ‘a system of invisible
Catholicism and Masonry, although the French things visibly manifested’ (Heb. 11: 3) as referring
Revolution brought an abrupt end to this harmo- to a network of > correspondences between that
nious situation. Similarly, the lodges were places which is above and that which is below, linking
for an ambitious young man to make friends useful analogically the visible and invisible levels of real-
for advancement and to discuss political reforms. ity. (3) The defense of divinatory intuition, or
Nevertheless, de Maistre’s masonic activities ap- immediate participation in the thought of God on
pear to have delayed his rise through the ranks of which truth rests (these last two are the grounds for
the Savoy judicature, and upon the outbreak of the the Catholic charge that de Maistre confused the
Revolution he was suspected by the authorities of natural and supernatural realms). (4) The allegori-
participating in Jacobin conspiracies in Savoy. De cal interpretation of Scripture in order to render
Maistre abandoned the lodges in 1790, but never intelligible passages otherwise unintelligible. (5)
broke with his theosopher friends, nor with Illu- The metaphysics of numbers [> Number Symbol-
minist themes. ism] as a proof of the supreme intelligence. (6) The
Around 1810, however, and coincident with his hope for a reunification of Christian churches. (7)
writing of Du Pape, with its theme of obedience to The conviction that prophecy is always present
papal authority, de Maistre experienced a crisis of among humanity, and will soon lead to a new and
suspicion of Illuminism. He denounced individual- glorious efflorescence of Christianity. (8) The
ist tendencies within Illuminism and condemned expectation of a third revelation that will complete
the revolutionary agitation and opposition to and supersede the Old and New Testaments.
legitimate authority of some Illuminist groups. If
Catholic commentators have sometimes down- Ecrits Magonniques de Joseph de Maistre et de
played de Maistre’s ties to IIluminism, those on the quelques-uns de ses amis franc-magons (Jean Rebot-
ton, ed.), Geneva: Slatkine, 1983; this work includes
Illuminist side have sometimes overlooked de
the Mémoire au duc de Brunswick and a valuable
Maistre’s criticisms of these aspects of it. By 1816 introduction by Rebotton ¢ Les Soirées de Saint-
de Maistre had arrived at his final position on Illu- Pétersbourg, ou Entretiens sur le gouvernement tem-

--- Page 175 ---
75% MANDAEANS
porel de la Providence, Paris: Cossin, 1821; English “laymen” in distinction from the “priests” (tar-
edition: St. Petersburg Dialogues, or Conversations on midi, originally “disciples”) and “initiates” (naso-
the Temporal Government of Providence, Montreal &
ratyi). Portuguese Catholic missionaries of the 17th
Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1993 ¢
century called them “disciples of John the Baptist”
Oeuvres completes, 14 vols., Lyon: Vitte, 1884-1886.
and thus they were known in European literature
Lit.: Revue des études maistriennes 5-6 (1979-1980): until the r9th century under this name or that of
“Joseph de Maistre: Illuminisme et Franc-Macon- “John-Christians” (true is only that they consider
nerie”, Actes du colloque de Chambéry, 4 et 5 mai, John the Baptist to be one of their former priests or
1979 (Engl. trans.: R.A. Lebrun [ed.], Maistre Studies, disciples). The Muslims gave them the name “Sabi-
Lanham: University Press of America, 1988) ¢ Emile
ans” (in modern dialect: Subba), known from the
Dermenghem, Joseph de Maistre mystique: Ses rap-
Quran and early Arabic literature (“Sabians of ports avec le martinisme, I'Illuminisme, et la Franc-
Magonnerie. L’influence des doctrines mystiques et Marshes”); it enabled them to be considered “peo-
occultes sur sa pensée religieuse, Paris: La Columbe, ple of the book”, and thus to be tolerated by Islam.
nouvelle édition, 1946 # Georges Goyau, Le Pensée Probably the original meaning of the word is “bap-
religieuse de Joseph de Maistre, Paris: Perrin, 1921 ¢ tists, those who baptize” (from the Aramaic root
Francois Vermale, Le Franc-Maconnerie savoisienne a SBA “to immerse, baptize, wash”).
P’époque révolutionnaire, Paris: Leroux, 1912.
2. LITERATURE
ARTHUR MCCALLA Over many centuries, the Mandaeans have pro-
duced extensive and diverse forms of literature: rit-
Mandaeans ual books (liturgies, prayers, hymns) and
commentaries, theological/mythical _ tractates,
EeNAM ES 22 LiITBRATURE 3. ORIGIN illustrated scrolls, legends, and magical texts. Since
AND History 4. DOCTRINE we do not know the names and dates of the
See RU AW authors, editors or compilers, it is very difficult to
give exact information about the origins and the
1. NAME age of this literature. Often the nature of the writ-
The Mandaeans are an ancient religious commu- ings creates a problem of interpretation, because
nity living traditionally in several settlements in early and late materials are interwoven. Surely the
southern Iraq (Basra, Baghdad, Amarah, Nasi- collection of many writings into “books” (sidria)
riya, Sug esh-Shuyukh) and in Iranian Khuzistan had already started before the invasion of Islam
(Ahwaz, Disful, Shushtar), but after the Gulf wars into the Mandaean settlements in Mesopotamia
(1980-1986 and 1990-1991) also in Europe (e.g. (635). Apart from these, other texts have been
Sweden, Denmark), the USA and Australia. They transmitted in the older form of scrolls; when they
are thought to consist of ca. 40.000 members. are illustrated (in a peculiar style), they are called
For centuries, most of them seem to have been sil- “Diwans”. The oldest magical texts (bowls and
ver- and iron-smiths, boat-builders and bridge- lead scrolls) can be dated to the 3rd and 4th cen-
constructors, but today they are also practising turies C.E. All the texts have been copied by hand
other modern professions. What they do not have until our times; but in 1998 the first computer print
in common with the surrounding peoples is their of Mandaean manuscripts was published by Man-
religious tradition or faith, and their traditional daeans in Australia, based on a newly-created font
literature, which is written in an unique Semitic of Mandaean letters.
(East-Aramaic) dialect and script (both are called Modern investigations of the records of the text
“Mandaic” by Semitists). Nowadays, with the copyists (colophons) and comparisons of the special
exception of their priests, only very few Man- terminology, style, and phrases with non-Man-
daeans still know their traditional language and daean literature (Gnostic and Manichaean [>
writing. In some of the Iranian settlements, several Manichaeism]) have shown that the liturgical and
kinds of “Modern Mandaic” have been preserved. poetic writings must be postulated to have existed
According to the Mandaean sources, the earliest already in the 3rd century C.E. The script of the
self-designations are: “elect of righteousness” texts was probably developed in the 2nd century or
(bhiria zidqa) and “guardians” or “possessors” earlier, using late-Mesopotamian Aramaic alpha-
(nasuraiyi), i.e. of secret rites and knowledge. bets, in order to preserve the more ancient religious
“Mandaeans” (mandayi) refers back to the ancient tradition which originated in Palestine and Syria
term for “knowledge”, Gnosis (manda), and there- and was brought to Mesopotamia by oral tradition.
fore means “Gnostics”; but today it denotes the The more important Mandaean works are the

--- Page 176 ---
MANDAEANS
following: the Treasure (Ginza) or the Great Book 3. ORIGIN AND HISTORY
(sidra rba) is the most complete collection of writ- In spite of the extensive literature of the Man-
ings; it consists of two parts, the larger Right Ginza daeans it is very difficult to give an exact and com-
(ginza yamina) and the smaller Left Ginza (ginza plete history of their origins and development.
smala). The first one is a collection of eighteen There is only one short text of more or less histori-
(according to Lidzbarski) tractates with predomi- cal value, the Haran Gawaita mentioned above.
nantly cosmological (mythological), theological, Not much more is to be gained from passages of
and didactic contents, while the other one deals some other texts, e.g. the Right Ginza or the Book
only with the ascent of the soul to the realm of of John. Non-Mandaean sources are very rare,
light, which is why it is also called Book of the especially concerning the pre-Islamic period.
Souls (sidra dnismata). There exists only one edi- Therefore we mainly have to base ourselves on
tion based on ancient manuscripts (Petermann investigations of relevant texts, rituals, doctrines,
1867); a more recent one is based on three manu- and terminology in order to reconstruct the roots
scripts of the roth century (al-Mubaraki 1998). and early history of the community. According to
The Book of John (drasa dyahya) or Book ofthe the Mandaean tradition, the former “Nasoraeans”
Kings (i.e. Angels, drasia dmalkia) is a collection of had been expelled from Jerusalem (‘uraslam) by the
mixed contents. The main parts deal with the “ser- Jews (yahutaiia). The destruction of Jerusalem (70
mons” of John the Baptist, the “discourses” of C.E.) is seen as punishment for this act. In the same
Shum (Shem), the appearance of Anosh (Enosh) context it is told that John the Baptist (yuhana,
in Jerusalem and the story of the conversion of yahya) as a “disciple” or “priest” (tarmida) of the
Mary (Miryaz) from Judaism to Mandaeism. The Nasoraeans was an opponent of Jesus Christ (‘su
liturgical hymns, prayers, and ritual instructions msiha), who was baptized by him, but then aposta-
are collected in the Canonical Prayer-book, in tized in order to establish his own community. For
Mandaic called Oolasta (“praise” or generally the Mandaeans John the Baptist is not the founder
“collection of hymns”). The first two parts of the of their religion but only one of their prominent
book contain the liturgy for the baptism (masbuta) representatives — particularly over against the Mus-
and the mass for the dead (masiqta); both are still lims he is their “prophet”. Until now, there is no
used today by the priests. A series of other ritual strict proof that the Mandaeans were originally fol-
texts or scrolls have been published only in recent lowers of John the Baptist. The only testimony for
times, e.g. the wedding ritual, a ritual for the or- such a relationship is their central rite, baptism
dination (“crowning”) of priests, a ritual for a (masbuta), which can not be performed without
polluted priest. Other, similar texts are still unpub- a priest, who, like John, is witness and performer
lished. A large collection of writings for priestly use of baptism. Without any doubt the significant
only is the so-called ror2 Questions (alf trisar water ceremonies (lustrations) go back to the
Suialia). area of the so-called Jewish baptist sects that flour-
Some of the scrolls are illustrated, like the inter- ished between the 2nd century B.C. and the 2nd
esting Diwan Abathur, which deals with the ascent century C.E.
of the soul through the heavenly purgatories, or the Some linguistic arguments based on special
Diwan of the Rivers (diuan nahrawata), which Mandaic terms (e.g. Jordan/ Yardna, manda, kusta,
gives an impression of the traditional (geogra- yu — beings, nasuraia, masbuta) refer to the west-
phical) world view of the Mandaeans. The only Aramaic (or old-Aramaic) period. There are also
historical information on early periods of the Man- several similarities in style and phraseology
daeans is given by the (fragmentary) Diwan of the between Mandaic and early-Syriac/Christian liter-
Great Revelation called Haran Gawaita (i.e. inte- ature (Gospel of John, Odes of Solomon, Acts of
rior Haran). Two scrolls include speculative inter- Thomas). Significant for an early stage of the Man-
pretations of rituals for the ascending soul, the daean religion is the impact of Gnosticism on its
Great First World (alma rigaia rba) and the Small ideology (see below). This can be shown by the
First World (alma risaia zuta), published by Lady strict dualistic world view with its two opposite
Drower in 1963. Another one describes and principles of light and darkness and by many
explains the “coronation” of a priest, called Diwan parallels to Gnostic sources (e.g. in the domains of
of Exalted Kingship (diuan malkuta ‘laita). The cosmogony and anthropogony), especially to some
Book of the Signs of the Zodiac (sfar malwaéia) of the Nag Hammadi texts (e.g. Apocalypse of
serves the priests for horoscopes and for giving the Adam, Apocryphon of John, Hypostasis of the
secret (religious) names to the Mandaeans, the so Archons, Origin of the World). Probably Man-
called “Malwashi names”. daeism has its origin in the early history of Jewish

--- Page 177 ---
oye) MANDAEANS
religion before the consolidation of rabbinic ortho- reached with regard to source analysis and redac-
doxy. The polemics against Judaism (-> Moses tion. Solid results of such investigations would
being presented as the prophet of the bad “spirit”, undoubtedly enable scholars to isolate early tradi-
Ruha), and Christianity (Jesus being presented as tions and thus to trace their development through-
the false messiah and a manifestation of the bad out the extensive and diverse Mandaean literature.
planet Nbu-Mercury) have to be seen as elements Here only a brief summary of the main lines of
of the preservation process of a new religion based Mandaean thought can be presented.
on Jewish and Gnostic ideas and baptist rituals, The cosmology is marked by a strict (Gnostic)
which were documented in a special tradition and dualism between a “world of light” (alma dnhura)
literature. and a “world of darkness” (alma dhsuka). The
In the successive history, the exodus from Jewish world of light is ruled by a sublime being who bears
Palestine to the East is connected with the “Median different names: “Life” (biia, resp. haiyi), “Great
Hills” (tura dmadai) or the “Interior Harran” Life” (hiia rbia), “First Life” (hiia qadmaiia),
(haran gawaita): legendary names of places of the “Lord of Greatness” (mara drabuta), “Geat Mind”
East, and with one of the Iranian king Ardban (mana rabba), “King of Light” (malka dnhura).
(either Artabanus III or IV). It is said that the Naso- He, or It, is surrounded by countless beings of light,
raeans settled in Mesopotamia, where they suffered called “wealth” (uthria) or “kings” (malkia), living
oppression by the Sassanian kings (since 224). This in dwellings (skinata) or “worlds” (almia), per-
can be confirmed by one of the inscriptions of the forming cultic acts and praising the “Life”. The
Zoroastrian high-priest Kirtir (end of 3rd century), world of light came into being from the “First Life”
which, among several persecuted communities, by way of descending emanations or creations,
also mentions “Baptists” (“washers”) and “Naso- which are called “Second”, “Third”, and “Fourth”
raeans”. At the same time, > Mani (217-274) grew Life; they also bear personal names, such as
up in a Mesopotamian branch of the > Elchasai, a Yoshamin, Abathur, and Ptahil. The last one is
Jewish-Christian baptist sect. We know his later later on the creator of the world (earth).
polemic against this community and other similar The “World of Darkness” is governed by the
groups, among them presumably the early Man- “King of Darkness” (malka dhsuka) and arose
daeans or Nasoraeans. There are some common from the “Dark waters” (chaos). Its main powers
traits between Manichaean and Mandaean termi- are a giant, monster or dragon, with the name Ur
nology, mainly in the poetry or hymn books (e.g. (i.e. probably a polemic transformation of Hebr.
Psalm of Thomas). Much of the Mandaean history ‘or ‘light’) and the bad (female) “Spirit” (Ruha).
can thus be traced back to the first centuries of the Their offsprings are demonic beings (daiuia; devs)
Christian era in the Near East. After the Islamic and “angels” (malakia). To them belong also the
conquest (635) the situation of the Mandaeans did “Seven” (suba) or Planets (sibiahia) and the
not change completely, because they were accepted “Twelve” (trisar) signs of the Zodiac.
as adherents of a “religion of the book” and iden- The hostile relations between light and darkness,
tified with the Sabians (as-Sabi‘un) mentioned in life and death, good and evil leads to the creation of
the Qur’an (2, 62; 5, 69; 22,17). In later Arabic the world (tibil) by the demiurge Ptahil with the
sources they are also called “Sabians of the help of the dark powers, mainly the planets. In this
Marshes”, as distinct from the Harranians or Sabi- process, the body (pagra) of the first man, Adam, is
ans; these were heresiological designations for created by the same beings, but the “animating
special religious groups of pre-Islamic times, and essence” is derived from the World of Light. This
eventually for paganism in general. In spite of the “substance of light” in Adam is called “inner
toleration, by Islam, of the Mandaeans as Sabians, (hidden) Adam” (adam kasya, adakas) and repre-
their circumstances remained difficult. The trans- sents the “soul” (nisimta, nisma) or “mind”
mission texts (colophons) are filled with news (mana) in humans, which has to be saved or res-
about local pogroms. This changed only with the cued from the dark, evil body or world by heavenly
British rule of Mesopotamia (1918) and after the beings of light. The salvation of these “souls” is the
founding of the Republic of Iraq (1958). main concern of the Mandaean religion. One of its
central creeds is the belief in several “messengers”
4. DOCTRINE (parwanga), “helpers” (saruia), or “redeemers”
It is not very easy to present a coherent picture of (paruqa), sent by the “Life” in order to inform the
the beliefs of the Mandaeans, particularly concern- people by their “call” and to save the souls.
ing the origin, growth and development of the The dominant figure of these envoys of light
traditions. No scholarly consensus has yet been is the “Knowledge of Life” (Manda dHiia,

--- Page 178 ---
MANDAEANS TDA
resp. deHaiyi), who is also called “Son of Life” soul) can be earned by giving alms, being merciful,
(Barhiia, resp. Barhaiyi) or “Counterpart of Life” obeying father and mother, and taking part in the
(Dmuthiia, resp. Dmuthaiyi). Beside him stand the ceremonies and prayers. According to different tra-
three heavenly Adamites, Hibil (Abel), Sitil (Seth), ditions and influences, the times of the daily
and Anos (Enosh). Actually the Mandaeans know prayers vary between three, five and seven. Like
no “historical” redeemers but only “mythological” the Christians, the Mandaeans honour the Sunday,
ones appearing throughout the different ages of the or in Mandaic the “first day of the week”
history of the world as a repetition of the first rev- (habsaba). The religious calendar follows the sun
elation to Adam. Only after the confrontation with and has six festivals: the New Year (Dibba rba or
early Christianity did they develop the story that Nauruz rba), the Little New Year (Nauruz zuta),
one of their messengers (Anos or Manda dHatyi) the Little Feast (Dibba hnina or Dibba tirma), the
appeared in Jerusalem as an antagonist of Jesus Ashuriya, the Pansha or Parwanatya (the five inter-
Christ (‘su msiha), in order to expose him as a liar. calar days or Epagomenae; the main feast at the
In this connection John the Baptist played the role end of the year), and the Baptismal Feast (Dibba
of a true Mandaean “disciple” or “priest” (tar- daimana).
mida), not as a redeemer or founder of the Man-
daean religion. For the Mandaeans, death is the Fo, ROOF ANIL
“day of salvation” (yum purqana), because the The centre of the Mandaean religion is its cult.
soul is ready to leave the body (three days after For centuries the traditional cultic locations
the burial) and to start with the long journey to the (mandi) have been the principal centres of the local
worlds of light through the purgatories of the communities. They consist — probably we have to
demonic powers, which try to catch the soul; only say consisted — of a small hut (maskna, bit manda,
the pious are able to reach the Life and its realm, bimanda) made of mud and reed. In front of it lies
with the help of some rituals (see below) and of the the pool or “Jordan” (yardna) with flowing water;
heavenly redeemers. There is also the idea of the therefore the sanctuaries are always situated next
end of the world, called “day of end” (yuma dsuf) to rivers or channels. Besides the Mandi the rituals
or “day of the last judgement” (yuma ddina), when were performed on the banks of rivers or creeks
the earth (tibil) and the bad and dark powers will close to the residence of the community. Since the
be destroyed by fire. Some later texts speak about mid-1970s the Mandaeans have changed the tradi-
resurrection and a Mandaean reign of freedom tional location of their cultic areas in order to
after the realm of the false Messiah (Christ). avoid polluted streams and rivers. Modern cultic
The behaviour of the Mandaeans is mainly based houses are built of bricks and the ritual font is
on some ethical standards similar to those of the made of stone and connected with the public water
Jews and Christians. A collection of laws — a kind system. But at present there is again a trend of
of a Mandaean Torah — is preserved in the first two going back to the traditional pattern of performing
books of the Right Ginza (I, § 77-180; II, 1, § 12- the baptism in rivers; this also has to be done out-
116 Lidzbarski). In spite of the strict distinction side of Iraq and Iran, i.e. in the communities of the
between body and soul and the idea of the darkness Mandaean refugees.
of the world, marriage is a duty for the Mandaeans; The most important and oldest ceremonies are
marriages are mostly monogamous, but in earlier the “Baptism” (masbuta) and the “Ascent of the
times, under the influence of Islam, they could also Soul” (masiqta). The baptism, or “immersion”, is
be polygamous (but this practice was mainly performed every Sunday (habsaba) in flowing
restricted to priestly families). The Mandaeans do water (yardna; Jordan) and can only be done by a
not perform circumcision. A multitude of purifica- priest. It consists of two main parts. The first one is
tion rules, primarily by washing, are very impor- the actual baptismal rite including a threefold
tant for the life of the pious; these involve food and immersion (the participants dressed in sacral white
meals, slaughter (especially ritual slaughter of garments), a threefold “signing” (rusma) of the
chicken and sheep) and kitchen utensils (e.g. pots). forehead with water, a threefold gulp of water, the
Unique is the rejection of > music, due to the belief “crowning” with a small myrtle wreath (klila), and
that the demons and bad powers are making noise the laying on of hands by the priest. The second
by playing instruments in order to catch the souls part takes place on the banks of the stream and
(today this belief has become less usual). Fre- consists of the anointing with oil (susma, sesame),
quently the texts polemize against the veneration of the communion of bread (pihta) and water (mam-
foreign gods, devils, demons, pictures etc. Reli- buba), and the “sealing” of the neophyte against
gious benefits (primarily for a good ascent of the evil spirits. Both parts are finished by the ritual

--- Page 179 ---
755 MANDAEANS
handclasp or Kusta (“truth”). The purpose and Press, 1973) @ J.J. Buckley, The Scroll of Exalted
meaning of the baptism is not only a “purification” Kingship (AOS Transl. Ser 3), New Haven: American
Oriental Society, 1993 @ E.S. Drower, A Pair of Naso-
of sins and trespasses but also a special kind of
raean Commentaries: Two Priestly Documents,
communion (laufa) with the world of light, because Leiden: Brill, 1963 # Eadem, Diwan Abathur or the
it is believed hat all “Jordans” or “living waters” Progress through the Purgatories (Studi e Testi 151),
originate in the upper world of “Life”. There is no Citta del Vaticano: Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana,
doubt that the basic constituent features of the 1950 @ Eadem, Sarh d-Oabin d-Sislam-Rhba: Explana-
water ceremonies are derived from baptismal prac- tory Commentary on the Marriage Ceremony of the
tices (lustrations) of early Judaism in the pre-Chris- Great Sislam (Biblica et Orientalia 12), Rome: Pontifi-
cio Istituto Biblico, 1950 # Eadem, The Book of the
tian period (see above). Apart from this “full
Zodiac: Sfar Malwasia, London: Royal Asiatic Society,
baptism” ritual, there exist two lesser water rites, 1949 Eadem, The Canonical Prayerbook of the
which can be performed without a priest but Mandaeans, Leiden: Brill, 1950 # Eadem, The Coro-
always in flowing water. nation of the Great Sislam, Leiden: Brill, 1962 ¢ The
The other chief ceremony is a kind of mass for Haran Gawaita and the Baptism of Hibil-Ziwa (Studi
the dead, or rather for the soul of the dead, called e Testi 176), Citta del Vaticano: Biblioteca Apostolica
Vaticana, 1953 (repr. Modena: Tipo-litografica, 1986)
“Ascent” (masiqta). It is performed at the death of
¢ Eadem, The Thousand and Twelve Questians: Alf
a Mandaean and supports the “rise” of his soul to Trisar Suialia (DAW, Institut fiir Orientforschung 32),
the world of Light and Life. It consists of lustra- Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1960 @ M. Lidzbarski, Das
tions with flowing water, anointing with oil, and Johannesbuch der Mandder, Teil 1 (Text), Giessen:
crowning with a myrtle wreath. The main ritual Topelmann, 1905, Teil 2 (Translation), Giessen: Topel-
starts three days after death, respectively burial, mann, r9ts5 (repr. Berlin: Topelmann, 1966) ¢ Ginza.
when the soul is released from the body and begins Der Schatz oder das Grosse Buch der Mandder
(Quellen der Religionsgeschichte Vol. 13), Gottingen:
its forty-five-day “ascent” through the heavenly
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1925 (repr. 1979) ¢
purgatories (matarata) until it reaches the “home Mandaische Liturgien (Abh. Kgl. Gesellschaft d. Wiss.
of Life”. Recitations from the Left Ginza and cere- zu Gottingen, Phil.-hist. Kl., NF 17, 1), Berlin: Weis-
monial meals serve the ascending soul (including its mannsche Buchhandlung, 1920 (repr. Hildesheim:
symbolic nourishment, rebirth, and creation of a Olms 1962) ¢ H.J. Petermann, Thesaurus sive Liber
spiritual body). The roots of these ceremonies and Magnus, vulgo “Liber Adami” appelatus, opus Man-
daeorum summi ponderis J-II, Leipzig: Weigel, 1867
the idea of “meals in memory of the dead” proba-
H. Pognon, Inscriptions mandaites des coupes de
bly go back to Iranian-Zoroastrian soil, but they Khouabir I-Ill, Paris: Impremerie nationale, 1898
are shaped by the Gnostic background of the Man- (repr. Amsterdam: APA-Philo Press, 1979) ¢ Majid
daean religion. Fandi al-Mubaraki et al., Edition of the Ginza Rba:
The Mandaeans have many more rituals, such as The Great Treasure, Sydney, Australia: Al-Mubaraki,
the ordination of a priest and a bishop or “treas- 1998 # QOulasta. The Mandaean Liturgical Prayer
Book I, Sydney, Australia: Al-Mubaraki, 1999 ¢urer” (ganzibra), the end-of-year-ceremony (Par-
K. Rudolph, Mandaean Sources, in: W. Foerster (ed.),
wanatya or Pansha), the cleansing of the cult-hut or
Gnosis II: Coptic and Mandaean Sources, Oxford:
temple (maskna), the marriage ceremony (which Clarendon Press, 1974, 123-319 # idem, Der manddi-
includes baptism), and several kinds of funeral sche “Diwan der Fliisse” (Abh. Sachs. Akad. d. Wiss.
and commemorative meals, called “Communion” zu Leipzig, Phil.-hist. Kl. 70, 1), Berlin: Akademie Ver-
(lofani) and “Blessed Oblation (of alms)” (zidqa lag, 1982 ¢ M. Tarelko, Shapta d-Pishra d-Ainia: The
brikha). Scroll for the Purging of the Eyes, Turnhout: Brepols,
2001 E.M. Yamauchi, Mandaic Incantation Texts
Characteristic of the Mandaean religion is the
(AOS 49), New Haven: American Oriental Society,
close connection between rituals and gnostic
1967.
ideas. It is not only “knowledge” (manda, madihta,
yada) that brings salvation but also the ceremonies: Lit.: W. Brandt, Die manddische Religion: Ihre Ent-
primarily baptism and the “offices for the soul”, wicklung und geschichtliche Bedeutung, Leipzig: Hin-
which are indispensable means for the soul’s rich’sche Buchhandlung, 1889 « E.S. Drower, The
release. One may indeed say that gnosis has Mandaeans ofIraq and Iran, Oxford: Clarendon Press,
been implanted here into the ancient stock of a cul- 1937 (new ed. Leiden: Brill, 1962) # idem, “A Man-
daean Bibliography”, in: Journal of the Royal Asiatic
tic ceremony of probably Jewish origin; but from
Society, 1953, 34-39 (on the Drower Collection of
this connection, an authentic and even typical Mandaean manuscripts in the Bodleian Library,
Mandaean-Nasoraean offspring was created. Oxford) ¢ H. Jonas, Gnosis und spdatantiker Geist I:
Die mythologische Gnosis, Gottingen: Vandenhoeck
W. Brandt, Manddische Schriften, Gottingen: Vanden- & Ruprecht, 1934, 4th rev. edition, 1988 E. Lupieri,
hoeck & Ruprecht, 1893 (repr. Amsterdam: Philo- The Mandaeans: The Last Gnostics, Grand Rapids:

--- Page 180 ---
MANDAEANS 756
Eerdmans, 2001 (= 1 Mandei: Gli ultimi gnostict, Bres- of ‘Baptists’ were (a group within the) > Elchasai.
cia 1993) ¢ R. Macuch, “Anfange der Mandaer”, in: According to the CMC, these Jewish Christians
E. Altheim & R. Stiehl (eds.), Die Araber in der Alten practised daily ablutions of their bodies and food;
Welt, Bd. 2, Berlin: W. de Gruyter, 1965, 76-190 ¢ referred to their religion as the Law; emphasized
idem, Handbook of Classical and Modern Mandaic,
the keeping of the Sabbath; referred repeatedly to
Berlin: W. de Gruyter, 1965 # idem (ed.), Zur Sprache
und Literatur der Mandder, Berlin: W. de Gruyter, ancestral traditions; but also acknowledged Jesus
1976 @ Th. Noéldeke, Manddische Grammatik, as the Saviour.
Halle/S.: Buchhandlung des Waisenhauses, 1875 (repr. The bare fact of this descent from the Jewish-
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1964) Christian milieu of the Elchasai may explain
¢ S.A. Pallis, Essay on Mandaean Bibliography Mani’s connections with gnostic Christianity.
1560-1930, London/ Copenhagen, 1933 (repr. Ams-
Here, one can also find the initial sources for his
terdam: Philo-Press, 1974) # K. Rudolph, Die
strict asceticism and his eschatology that, to a far- Mandéder I: Prolegomena: Das Mandderproblem, Got-
tingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1960; IJ. Der Kult, reaching extent, was determined by Jewish-Christ-
Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1961 @ idem, ian and Encratite (strongly ascetic) ideas. The
Theogonie, Kosmogonie und Anthropogonie in den notion, attributed to Elchasai, of the earth being
manddischen Schriften, Gottingen: Vandenhoek & ‘the flesh and blood of my Lord’ (CMC 97, 9-10)
Ruprecht, 1965 ¢ idem, Die Religion der Mandaer, in: can be treated as the basis of the Manichaean doc-
H. Gese, M. H6fner, K. Rudolph, Die Religionen Alt-
trine of Jesus as the one who suffers in the whole
syriens, Altarabiens und der Mandder (Religionen der
Menschheit 10,2), Stuttgart, 1970, 403-462 ¢ idem, cosmos (Jesus patibilis). Evidently, it was also the
Mandaeism (Th.P. van Baaren et al. (eds.), Iconogra- Jewish-Christian concept of the true prophet
phy of Religions, Section XXI), Leiden: Brill, 1978 revealing himself anew in various periods of his-
idem, Gnosis und spatantike Religionsgeschichte: tory that was accepted by Mani and his early disci-
Gesammelte Aufsdtze (NHMS 42), Leiden: Brill, 1996, ples (cf. CMC 47, 1-72, 7). Besides, it seems to be
302-626 # E. Segelberg, Masbuta: Studies in the Ritual
most likely that already in this sect Mani had
of Mandaean Baptism, Uppsala: Almqvist & Wiksells,
become acquainted with astrological speculations 1958 @ idem, Gnostica-Mandaica-Liturgica, Uppsala:
Almavist & Wiksells, 1990 ¢ G. Widengren (ed.), Der [> Astrology] such as are particularly present in his
Manddismus (Wege der Forschung 167), Darmstadt: cosmology.
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1982. The Cologne Mani Codex demonstrates that,
initially, Mani tried to be the prophetic reformer of
KURT RUDOLPH the Elchasai. From his earliest youth he received
revelations. A special revelation by his Syzygos or
Mani,* 14.4.216 near heavenly Twin was imparted to him at the begin-
Seleucia-Ctesiphon, t 26.2.277 ning of his 25th year (CMC 17, 8ff.; 73, 5f.).
Beth-Lapat (Gundeshapur) Because of the fragmentary status of its quires, it
remains unclear whether or not the CMC mentions
Mani, the founder of the gnostic [> Gnosticism] a major revelation at the end of Mani’s twelfth
world religion of > Manichaeism, was born near year. Both the Coptic Manichaean Kephalaia (14,
the southern Mesopotamian town of Seleucia-Cte- 31) and the Arabic writer al-Biruni (¢ 1048) also
siphon on the Tigris. More or less trustworthy orig- explicitly mention such a major revelation at
inal Manichaean sources on his life are relatively the end of his twelfth year; it may remind one of
late and scanty. It now seems certain that his Jewish (bar mitswah) as well as Christian legacy
father’s name was Pattig or Pattég (Greek: Pat- (cf. the twelve-year-old Jesus in the temple). The
tikios; Latin: Patticius; Arabic: Futtuq); the name traditions about such a revelation seem to reach
of his mother was probably Maryam or Miryam. It back to accounts given by Mani himself in his
may be questioned whether his mother had close Shabuhragan.
ties with the then still ruling house of the Arsacids: A clear identification of Mani’s Syzygos or Twin
more likely these and other claims of noble birth with the promised Paraclete (e.g. Kephalaia 14,
are only pious legends. A recently re-established 32ff. & 15, 22f.) may well have been derived from
fact, however, is the narrative already handed traditions in the Aramaic Christian Church of
down by the roth century Muslim writer Ibn an- Mesopotamia that equated the Holy Spirit (which
Nadim in his Fibrist or Catalogue that from his is given at baptism) with one’s guardian angel. By
early youth onwards Mani grew up ina community adopting the title of Paraclete (cf. Gospel of John
of Mugtasilah, that is: ‘those who wash (or: bap- 14, 16) for himself, Mani indicated that he would
tize) themselves’. The Cologne Mani Codex (e.g. follow in Jesus’ footsteps. Yet the Manichaeans not
CMC 94-97) confirms that the members of this sect only identified Mani with the Paraclete, but also

--- Page 181 ---
ASE MANICHAEISM
considered him to be the new Jesus (e.g. Coptic probability on 26.2.277. In several Manichaean
Manichaean Psalm-Book 9, 3-7; 12, 28-32; etc.). sources his death is described as a crucifixion. His
Thus Mani would be, at the final judgment, both gnostic-theosophic doctrinal system, however,
the Judge and the peace giving Paraclete (e.g. which was well-described in a number of canonical
Psalm-Book 20, 1oft.). Apart from these and other works, soon spread from Mesopotamia to the
appropriations of genuine Jewish and Jewish- Atlantic in the West and, finally, as far as the Pacific
Christian heritage, the various but fragmentary in the East. On Mani’s missionary activities, doc-
sources of his life also testify to Mani’s conscious trinal system, Canon, ecclesiastical organization,
imitation of the apostle Paul. The recurrent desig- etc., see -> Manichaeism.
nation of Mani as ‘apostle of Jesus Christ’ is a clear
manifestation of this imitatio Pauli (e.g. CMC A. Adam, Texte zum Manichdismus, Berlin: De
66,4-5), as is the emphatic mention of Paul in the Gruyter, 1969* # A. Henrichs & L. Koenen, “Ein
series of those who received the true revelation griechischer Mani-Codex (P. Colon. inv. nr. 4780)”,
Zeitschrift fiir Papyrologie und Epigraphik 5 (1970),(CMC 60-62). This concentration on a gnostic tai-
97-216 (first preliminary publication of the CMC) ¢
lored Paul, a process in which + Marcion and
A. Bohlig, Die Gnosis, Dritter Band: Der Manichdais-
Bardesanes (the Syrian Christian “heretic” Bar- mus, Ziirich & Minchen: Artemis Verlag, 1980 ¢
Daisan, 154-222, a native of Edessa who, apart L. Koenen & C. Rémer, Der K6lner Mani-Kodex: Uber
from docetism, probably taught a kind of astrolog- das Werden seines Leibes. Kritische Edition aufgrund
ical fatalism) seem to have played a role, led to der von A. Henrichs und L. Koenen besorgten Erstedi-
Mani’s break with the sect of his youth. After he tion, Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1988 ¢ H.J.
Klimkeit, Gnosis on the Silk Road: Gnostic Texts from
had heard the Call from the heavenly world
Central Asia, San Francisco: Harper, 1993 ¢ C.E.
through the inspiration of his “Syzygos”, or “Com-
Romer, Manis friihe Missionsreisen nach der Kolner
panion”, Mani went out: ‘I am a grateful hearer / Manibiographie: Textkritischer Kommentar und Er-
who was born in the land of Babylon. /I was born lduterungen zu p. 121-p. 192 des Kdlner Mani-Kodex,
in the land of Babylon / and I am set up at the gate Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1994.
of the truth. /I ama singer, a hearer, /who has come
from the land of Babylon. / I have come from the Lit.: E. Decret, Mani et la tradition manichéenne, Edi-
land of Babylon / to send forth a call in the world’ tions du Seuil: Paris 1974 @ O. Klima, Manis Zeit und
Leben, Prag: Verlag der Tschechoslowakischen Aka-
(Turfan fragment M 4).
demie der Wissenschaften, 1962 @ S.N.C. Lieu, Mani-
Immediately after his vocation, Mani started his chaeism in the Later Roman Empire and Medieval
missionary journeys inside and outside Iran, at first China, Tiibingen: Mohr, 19927 @ J. van Oort, “The
only accompanied by his father and two other Paraclete Mani as the Apostle of Jesus Christ and the
members of the sect. While missionaries like Adda Origins of a new Church”, in: A. Hilhorst (ed.),
The Apostolic Age in Patristic Thought, Leiden: Brill,were sent to the Western, Roman, provinces, in 241
2004, 139-157 @ M. Tardieu, Le manichéisme, Paris:
Mani sailed by boat to India and subsequently
Presses Universitaires de France, 1981 (= 19977).
journeyed up the Indus valley to Turan, where he
won over the king for himself. Soon after the acces-
JOHANNES VAN OORT
sion of Shapur I (242-273) as the sole King of
Kings, Mani returned to Babylonia. He probably
delivered his only Middle Persian writing, the Manichaeism
Shabuhragan, to the new Shahanshah on 9 April
243. His admittance into Shapur’s entourage 1. History OF RESEARCH
(comitatus), together with the permission to prop- 2. ORIGINAL SOURCES 3. MISSION
agate his new syncretistic religion, accorded him 4. ORGANIZATION 5. DOCTRINE
unique opportunities. After Shapur’s death, Mani 6. SALVATION AND ETHICS
also found a willing ear with Shapur’s son and suc- 7. ORIGINS
cessor Hormizd (Ohrmazd, 272-273). However, at
the beginning of the second year of the reign of 1. HISTORY OF RESEARCH
Bahram I (274-276/7), this benevolent attitude dis- Manichaeism is the gnostic world religion which
appeared: Kardér, the head of the Magi whose aim was named after > Mani. Although this self-styled
was a thorough reform of the Zoroastrian church, gnostic prophet and “apostle of Jesus Christ”
began to persuade the Great King to take action flourished in the 3rd century C.E., it was not before
against the prophet from Babylon. Mani was sum- the beginning of the 18th century that his religion
moned before Bahram, duly accused, put in chains, became the object of serious historical and theo-
and tortured. After 26 days in prison he died, in all logical research.

--- Page 182 ---
MANICHAEISM 758
During many centuries, the term “Mani- sche Religionssystem nach den Quellen neu unter-
chaeism” was in use in the West, but mainly as a sucht und entwickelt. Although Baur attached too
label falsely applied when rejecting any dissenting much importance to Buddhism as a formative ele-
opinion. In the course of the Middle Ages, both in ment in Mani’s religion, his study is of lasting value
the Church and the State, the label “Manichaeism” because of its meticulous analysis of the traditions
was used increasingly, even if opinions to which it preserved by the Church Fathers, > Augustine in
was applied had nothing to do with the religion in particular. After the ground-breaking work of
question. Thus dissenters from established social Baur, the r9th century also saw the publication of
and theological opinions were routinely labeled new Oriental source material by scholars like
Manichaeans (examples are the Paulicians and the G. Fliigel (Mani, seine Lehre und seine Schriften,
Bogomils [-> Bogomilism] and particularly the Leipzig 1862; An-Nadim, Fihrist al- Ulam, Leipzig
Cathars [> Catharism] in Southern France and 1871-1872); E. Sachau (Al-Biruni, Chronologie
some regions of Northern Italy). In the 16th cen- orientalischer Volker, Leipzig 1878); K. Kessler
tury, Luther and other Protestants like Matthias (Mani: Forschungen tiber die manichdische Reli-
Flacius Illyricus were accused of Manichaeism, and gion, Berlin 1889); and H. Pognon (Inscriptions
in this respect not only biased theologians played a mandaites des coupes de Khouabir, Paris 1898).
part, but even an irenical scholar such as Erasmus This new information, together with the material
could not restrain himself. Because of such accusa- already known from Greek and Latin sources, pro-
tions, it was in protestant circles that Mani and his vided a solid basis for subsequent studies.
religion first became the objects of serious study. In
order to defend his friend Matthias Flacius, Cyria- 2. ORIGINAL SOURCES
cus Spangenberg wrote his brief Historia Mani- Still, all this research was based upon materials
chaeorum (Ursel 1578). Another early but still that had been collected mainly from Christian
rather speculative attempt was made by the notori- opponents of Manichaeism such as [Ps.] Athana-
ous dissident > Gottfried Arnold in his Unpar- sius, Epiphanius, Hegemonius, Cyril of Jerusalem,
teyische Kirchen- und Ketzer-Historie (Francfort Ephraem the Syrian, Serapion of Thmuis, Didymus
1699-1700). Against all current opinions, this Ger- the Blind, Titus of Bostra, Augustine, Theodor bar
man Pietist tried to understand and even to justify Koni, Severus of Antioch; from pagans such as
the Manichaeans. He particularly stressed the cru- Alexander of Lycopolis and the 6th century Neo-
elties perpetrated by the Catholics against them. platonist Simplicius; and from Muslims such as Ibn
The first genuinely scholarly study, and the foun- an-Nadim, al-Birani, a8-Sahrastani and Ibn al-
dation of all future research into Manichaeism, Murtada. Genuine Manichaean texts began to be
was written by the Huguenot Isaac de Beausobre. discovered from the beginning of the 2oth century
His monumental Histoire critique de Manichée et on. Between 1902-1914, Prussian archaeological
du Manichéisme was published in two substantial expeditions, first led by A. Griinwedel and then by
folio volumes in Amsterdam in 1734 and 1739. the more successful A. von Le Coq, brought back
Although apologetics was an important motive (De to Berlin several thousand fragments of Mani-
Beausobre tried to vindicate the Protestant Refor- chaean texts mainly originating from the sites of
mation, and in his efforts he sometimes even Turfan in Sinkiang (China) along the famous Silk
depicted Manichaeism as Protestantism avant la Road. These texts were written in some seventeen
lettre), subsequent studies have been able to build (then partly unknown) languages and dialects such
upon several of his profound insights. The origi- as Tokharian, Middle Persian, Parthian, Sogdian,
nality of De Beausobre’s analyses can be detected Uighur, “Bactrian”, New Persian and also Chinese.
in, for instance, his observations about the impor- The year 1905 brought the news of Sir Aurel Stein’s
tance of the Gospel of Thomas to the Manichaeans discovery of a large hoard of Buddhist and Mani-
and their use of Jewish Enochic lore. Not until the chaean manuscripts in Tun-huang (Dunhuang) in
discoveries at Nag Hammadi and Qumran has it Chinese Central Asia. Here, shortly afterwards, the
been possible to properly evaluate his remarkably French scholar Paul Pelliot was also successful, as
prescient insights. were some Chinese expeditions which followed
For almost a century after De Beausobre, virtu- him. Among the documents discovered at Turfan
ally no progress was made. Studies were usually were a Manichaean Confessional for the Hearers in
entrenched in anti-Manichaean polemics. A fresh Uighur (usually called the X"“dstvanift); among the
treatment of the subject had to wait until 1831, documents from Tun-huang were a lengthy doc-
when the theologian Ferdinand Christian Baur trinal tractate in Chinese (usually known as the
from Tiibingen published his book Das manichdi- Traité), the Compendium of the Doctrines and

--- Page 183 ---
Te? MANICHAEISM
Styles of the Teaching of Mani, the Buddha of Light This descent explains his deep familiarity with
(conserved in London; a supplementary part, Christian scriptures like the Gospels and the
known as the Fragment Pelliot, is in Paris), and the Pauline corpus. The Codex has opened a wide-
Chinese Hymnscroll. ranging debate on the Jewish and Christian origins
Subsequently, an important series of discoveries of Mani’s world religion. Most recent research (e.g.
followed in the West. As early as 1918, leaves of a John C. Reeves) even depicts essential elements in
Manichaean codex in Latin were found near Mani’s religion as stemming from Jewish sources:
Tébessa in Algeria (Codex Thevestinus or Frag- Jewish concepts have functioned as a point of
menta Tabestina), which seem to be part of a letter departure, or even as a basic principle, in the devel-
written by a Manichaean Elect to justify the life- opment of Manichaean concepts.
style of the Elect through a skilful use of Biblical Since 1991, other Manichaean texts have been
texts. At about the same time, a number of frag- discovered at the site of Ismant el-Kharab (Ismant
ments from Egypt in Syriac (but in an Estrangela the Ruined), ancient Kellis, in the Egyptian
script peculiar to Manichaean texts found in Cen- Dakhleh-Oasis. This site was submerged in sand
tral Asia) were discovered. The texts were origi- towards the end of the 4th century C.E. Apart from
nally published in a number of journals; afterwards about 3000 Greek and Coptic fragments on
they were collected together and republished by papyrus, the ongoing excavations uncovered,
EC. Burkitt (The Religion of the Manichees, Cam- among others, a palimpsest wooden board con-
bridge 1925, 111-119). In November 1929 a large taining a complete cycle of Manichaean anaphoric
number of Coptic Manichaean texts, the impor- prayers in Greek, some bilingual (Syriac-Coptic)
tance of which cannot easily be overestimated, was Manichaean texts, and fragments in “Mani-
first made known by antique dealers to the Danish chaean” Syriac. The new texts from Kellis are in the
Egyptologist H.O. Lange and then, in 1930, to the process of being edited, while archaeological work
Berlin scholar Carl Schmidt during a visit to Cairo. still continues on the site. An important part of the
Eventually the greater part of these manuscripts Coptic personal letters was written by Mani-
ended up Berlin; the other part was acquired by the chaeans: this provides the unique opportunity to
Irish-American collector Sir Chester Beatty for his study a Manichaean community. Amongst the lit-
famous collection of manuscripts in London (now erary texts, fragments from Mani’s own canonical
housed in Dublin). As is generally assumed, all works have been found. Some of the Kellis psalms
these Coptic texts, although they were found in parallel and even pre-date those from the Medinet
Medinet Madi in the Egyptian Fayoum, did not Madi Psalm-Book. There are also Coptic-Syriac
originate there but probably in the region of Assiut glossaries of technical Manichaean terms. It is
(ancient Lycopolis) in Upper Egypt. They are gen- expected that, in the foreseeable future, and after
erally dated about 350-400 C.E., and seem to be preliminary editions elsewhere, these documents
translations of Syriac originals that reach back to will be published as a separate Series Dachlaica
Mani himself or to the first generations of his in the new and, so it is hoped, comprehensive
Church. Now accessible in (facsimile) edition are series Corpus Fontium Manichaeorum (Turnhout
the lion’s share of the Kephalaia, the Psalm-Book, 1996ff.).
and the Homilies. Unfortunately, the bulk of three Notwithstanding the startling discovery of the
codices (among them a historical work that gave Cologne Mani Codex as an eyewitness account of
reports on Mani’s death and the early history of his Mani’s youth and first missionary journeys, our
Church, and a collection of Letters of Mani) seem knowledge of his life and deeds is still relatively
to have been lost in the aftermath of the Second scanty. The same goes for his own adherents in pre-
World War. A great surprise was the publication in vious centuries. In his compendium of heresies, the
1970 of another document from Egypt, i.e. the now Church Father Augustine characteristically begins
famous Greek Cologne Mani Codex. The Codex his description of Manichaeism as follows: ‘The
Manichaicus Coloniensis (CMC) contains a unique Manichaeans sprang from a certain Persian called
biography of Mani’s youth and first missionary Manes, but when his mad doctrine began to be
journeys based upon the eyewitness accounts of his preached in Greece, his disciples chose to call him
closest disciples. Through this Codex, the argu- Manichaeus to avoid the word for “madness”. For
ment for early Manichaeism to be studied as a man- the same reason some of them, somewhat more
ifestation of Jewish Christianity has received learned and therefore more deceitful, called him
a decisive impulse. The Cologne Mani Codex Mannichaeus, doubling the letter “n”, as if he were
demonstrated that Mani grew up in a Jewish- one who pours out manna’ (De haeresibus 46,1). In
Christian baptising sect in Southern Mesopotamia. this passage, it is actually not so much Augustine’s

--- Page 184 ---
MANICHAEISM 760
derision of Mani’s name by suggesting a connec- was in office for ten years). He was executed appar-
tion with madness (Greek: mania) that is conspicu- ently fifteen years after Mani’s death and was suc-
ous. Such a pun was obvious and used by many. It ceeded by Innaios (Hom. 83, 21).
is more characteristic that in regard to the person In the Graeco-Roman world, the Manichaean
of Mani, Augustine, who had been an auditor of Church expanded into Syria, Palestine, Arabia,
the sect for some ten years, confines himself to the Asia Minor, the Balkans (in 1906 a unique tomb-
statement that he was a Persian (Persa quidam). stone of a Manichaean electa named Bassa was dis-
This profile matches the then current view and even covered at Salona, near modern Split, in Dalmatia),
applied to members of the inner circle of Mani’s Roman Africa, Spain, Italy and Gaul. In the East,
Church: the words and doctrines of the master had Manichaeism was made the State religion among
to be considered important, but about his descent the Uighurs of Turkestan, by Bogii Qan in A.D.
one was usually badly informed. Besides, in this 762-763. In the centuries which followed, this
passage the simple (and in fact misleading) desig- highly syncretistic but in essence still gnostic reli-
nation of Mani as a Persian had a fatal ring to gion spread as far as the Indian Ocean and the
Roman ears because Persia was Rome’s hereditary China Sea.
enemy. But highly noteworthy and very accurate is Although Mani had failed to make his revelation
Augustine’s record that Mani’s name designates the official religion of Iran, he succeeded in what he
‘the one who pours out manna’. The Cologne Mani really intended: the establishment of a new world
Codex has confirmed that Mani styled himself the religion. Due to the Manichaeans’ missionary zeal,
new Johannine Christ ‘to scatter the bread on my their new Church soon became the dreaded com-
people’ (CMC 107, 18-20). It is thanks to this petitor of the official Christian Church both in the
Codex and several other authentic sources (partic- Roman Empire and elsewhere. Its firm organiza-
ularly those from Turfan and Medinet Madi, apart tion guaranteed a strong unity. Thanks to its organ-
from some remarkably accurate Arabic writers) ization and a system of teachings that could easily
that we have precise information about Mani’s be adapted, Manichaeism was a success already
descent. within the Graeco-Roman world.
3. MISSION 4. ORGANIZATION
Already during his lifetime, the Babylonian The interior organization of Mani’s religion was
prophet had dispatched several missions headed by a hierarchical one, headed by Mani’s deputy
his chief disciples: as far as Egypt came Adda or (archégos), who had his residence in Babylon until
Addai (Greek Addas, Chinese A-to; mentioned by the beginning of the roth century, when it was
Augustine according to a Hellenised version of his moved to Samarkand. The worldwide unity of this
name as Adimantus) and the missionaries Papos Church may be illustrated by the fact that, even in
and Thomas; as far as Chorasan and the Sogdiana the 8th century, a North-African is said to have
came Mar Ammo. Even before 277, a widespread been its leader (An-Nadim, Fihrist, transl. Dodge,
Church had developed within and even outside the 793). Immediately following the archégos or prin-
Persian Empire. Mani could legitimately say: ‘I ceps there were three subsequent ranks: 12 apostles
have [sown] the corn of life . . . from East to West; or teachers, 72 bishops, and 360 presbyters. The
as you see [my] hope [has] gone towards the East of fourth rank of this gnostic Church was consti-
the world and [all] the regions of the globe (i.e. the tuted by the electi, both men and women. The
West), to the direction of the North and the [South]. many scribes, illuminators of books and, for
None of the apostles has ever done this . . .” (Cop- example, Church musicians will have belonged
tic Manichaean Kephalaia p. 16). After his death, to these Elect. An official fifth rank consisted of
however, the Manichaean Church endured some the many male and female auditors (auditores, a
difficult times because of persecutions and schisms. term which e.g. in Syriac Christianity denoted the
In particular the persecutions under Bahram II catechumens).
(277-293) and Hormizd (Ohrmazd) II (303-3 10) The numbers 12 and 72 seem to be rooted in the
are reflected in the Manichaean sources. There was tradition of the Christian Church; the number 360
a long-term interregnum immediately after Mani’s will stem from astrological lore which, as a rule,
death, which even led to a temporary schism. Sisin- was highly valued in gnostic circles. The number 12
nios, Mani’s first successor as archégos (Head of reminds us of the example ofJesus’ 12 apostles, but
the Church), seems to have assumed office only perhaps this also goes for the number 72: in a typ-
after a vacancy of five years (cf. Coptic Mani- ically Jewish-Christian writing like the Pseudo-
chaean Homilies 83, 13, where it is stated that he Clementines, in the Acts of Thomas which were

--- Page 185 ---
761 MANICHAEISM
well-known among the Manichaeans and also substratum underlying the present text. The same
transmitted archaic Jewish-Christian traditions, turns out to be case with the new Kellis finds: at
and particularly in Tatian’s Diatessaron, it is said first glance these texts are “ordinary” Christian.
that Jesus sent out 72 (and not 70) missionaries. Thus more than once there appears to be little
knowledge of or interest in the many gods and
5. DOCTRINE demons among the Manichaeans; nor do we
Mani laid down his teaching in various books always find much interest in the intricacies of cos-
that were to gain canonical status throughout his mogony and cosmology.
Church. He himself took great pains to ensure that Nevertheless, Mani and his followers taught a
his teachings would be handed down in writing, in cosmogony of a definitely dualistic kind: evil is an
order to prevent what had already happened to eternal cosmic force, not the result of a fall. Two
other founders of religions, such as the Buddha, realms or kingdoms, the realm of light and the
Zarathustra and Jesus: the development of disputes realm of darkness, good and evil, God and matter,
as a result of the fact that they did not record their oppose each other implacably. It should be noted
doctrines in writing. Apart from the Sabubragan that this is not the Hellenistic dualism of spirit and
(which seems not to have been an official part of his matter, but one of two substances: the divine light
sevenfold Canon, although it was a widely-read is a visible, spatial and quantifiable element, as is
classic among the Manichaeans in Persia and Cen- the evil substance of darkness, the active principle
tral Asia), Mani composed all his writings in his of lust, the ‘thought (reflection, idea: enthymesis)
East Aramaic (Syriac) mother tongue and used a of death’.
variant of the Palmyrene script. The names of these In the kingdom of light the Father of Greatness
writings are usually given as follows: 1. The Living rules, and this kingdom is in fact an extension of
(or Great) Gospel; 2. The Treasure of Life; 3. The himself. It has four divine attributes (purity, light,
Pragmateia (or Treatise or Essay); 4. The Book of power, and wisdom) and the Father resides in his
Mysteries (Secrets); 5. The Book of the Giants; 6. five intellectual powers or limbs (reason, mind,
The Letters; 7. The Psalms and Prayers. All of them intelligence, thought, and understanding, which
survive only in fragmentary form. The non-canon- are otherwise substantially detailed as the five ele-
ical literature included the Kephalaia (Coptic), the ments of living air, light, wind, water, and fire). Sur-
Homilies (Coptic) as well as several hymn col- rounding the Father are the twelve aeons, equally
lections (e.g. the Coptic Psalter) and the Image distributed towards the four directions of heaven,
(Greek: Eikon; Persian/Parthian: Ardahang), a and refracted also into myriads of ‘aeons of the
painted picture-book illustrating the most impor- aeons’.
tant aspects of the doctrine. Opposed to this kingdom of light is the realm of
Manichaeism should be seen as a form of > the King of Darkness, a kingdom that is essentially
Gnosticism. The heart of this religion was Mani’s the domain of evil matter. It is disorderly and dom-
own speculative version of the gnostic myth of cos- inated by the “Prince of Darkness”, who is the
mic exile and salvation. As a religious system, product of (and even identified with) evil matter.
Manichaeism offered the promise of a salvation This dark realm likewise consists of five areas or
through the revealed knowledge (gnosis) of tran- worlds (dark reason, dark mind, and so on), which
scendent realities, including the divine nature of the are also referred to as the five dark elements of
soul, and of what needs to be known about the way smoke, fire, wind, water(s), and darkness. In this
to eternal life. area countless demons are actively present; they
All this is expressed in a detailed and very com- fight and devour each other.
plicated myth. Any account of this myth inevitably Because there was an accidental shift of these
tends towards an artificial synthesis. In several disorganized and senseless movements, the Prince
Manichaean and other sources we find important of Darkness (in fact a collective personification of
elements of Mani’s doctrinal tenets which turn out the five evil archons “ruling” the five worlds of
to be carefully adapted and tailored to the needs of darkness), having once reached the upper limit of
those addressed. This is particularly the case in his territory, glimpses the radiance of light, desires
works like the Coptic Kephalaia, the Middle Per- to possess its life, and therefore attacks the king-
sian Sabubragdn, and in the Chinese Traité, Com- dom of light.
pendium and Hymnscroll. However, in documents In the ensuing struggle, the Father of Light calls
such as the Cologne Mani Codex, the Tebessa forth the Mother of Life, who in turn evokes the
Codex and the Coptic Manichaean Psalter, the First Man. This is the first series of emanations or
mythical elements can only be detected as a kind of creations. It may be remarked in passing that, with

--- Page 186 ---
MANICHAEISM 762
regard to the emergence of new gods and godly ordered prison for the forces of darkness and also
powers, the Manichaeans strictly avoid any sug- as a place where the divine Soul is captured, the
gestion of generation and thus of evil sexuality. process of salvation can begin. To this end a third
Instead, they speak of “calling out” or “calling evocation of deities occurs. The Father of Great-
forth”. Accordingly the First Man, the “first born” ness calls forth the Third Messenger, or Ambas-
Son of God, was also called forth and, being sador, who is charged to extract and purify the light
equipped with the five powers of light that appear still retained by the powers of darkness and con-
personified as either his “sons” or his “arms”, went tained in their bodies. By taking advantage of the
out into battle. But the Primal Man was defeated, innate lust of the male and female archons who are
and his fivefold armour that constitutes the Living chained in the heavens, this Tertius Legatus and his
Soul or Living Self was devoured by the powers of female double the Virgin of Light (also represented
evil. To say it in Mani’s own words as quoted by the as the Twelve Maidens, each corresponding to a
Nestorian bishop Theodore bar Koni (8th cent.): sign of the Zodiac) make them relinquish the light
‘Then the Primal Man gave himself and his five they have devoured and still retain. It is concen-
sons to be consumed by the five sons of darkness, trated, in particular, in their semen and in their
like a man who has an enemy and mixes a deadly wombs. The “sins” of the male archons fall upon
poison into a cake and gives it’ (Lib. Schol. XI). the earth when they see the beautiful Maiden(s);
This having happened, the divine Soul (also out of that part of their semen that has fallen into
termed the Living Self that is suspended on the the water a monster arises; but this fearful beast
Cross of Light and particularly in the West person- is subjugated by the Adamas of Light. From the
ified as the suffering Jesus, Jesus patibilis) is mixed semen that has fallen on the dry ground, five trees
with the dark elements of matter and is therefore spring up, and from them all other forms of plant-
henceforth in need of redemption. The First Man, life originate. When the female archons, impreg-
being vanquished, lays unconscious in the depths. nated by their own evil nature, see the naked form
In order to redeem him, the Father of Light calls of the Third Messenger they are also agitated, and
forth a second series of emanations: a new divine their foetuses fall down upon the earth. These
trinity. First, the Father sends forth the Beloved of abortions not only survive their premature birth,
the Lights; from him comes the Great Builder; and but also devour the fruits of the trees that have
he in turn produces the Living Spirit who, like Pri- grown out of the semen of the male archons. Dri-
mal Man, has five sons: the King of Splendour; the ven by sexual lust, they unite with each other and
King of Honour; the Adamas of Light; the King of give birth to the innumerable species of animals as
Glory; and Atlas. The Living Spirit (also termed the we know them. The light that is not yet saved is
Father of Life) sends his Call from the lowest thus transferred to the earth where it is scattered
boundary of the world of light to the First Man and bound in plants and, to a lesser degree, in the
lying in the depths. By this Call, the First Man is bodies of animals.
aroused from his unconscious state and he re- This well-known episode in the Manichaean
sponds by an Answer. Then the Living Spirit, myth (referred to, ever since Francois Cumont, as
together with its five sons and the Mother of Life, “the seduction of the archons”) is a pivotal one.
descends to the First Man and leads him up to the Through recent research (e.g. Reeves) it has become
world of light. To rescue the light still captured increasingly clear that, apart from its origins in a
through the compound of the divine Soul with evil variety of earlier traditions, several details in this
matter, the Living Spirit constructs with the help of multifarious account are drawn from Jewish lore.
its sons ten heavens and eight earths. It is notewor- The next episodes of the Manichaean myth can
thy that this act of creation is performed by a god be summarized succinctly. In order to continue the
of light, not by an evil demiurge. Thus, in the gno- liberation of the light, the Third Messenger calls
sis of Manichaeism, the structure of the universe is forth the Column of Glory (also referred to as the
divinely devised. In order to create the cosmos, New or Perfect Man; cf. Ephesians 4, 12-13) and
however, it is necessary to use material of a mixed sets in motion the work of “the ships of light” (i.e.
substance (light and darkness). The sun and the sun and moon) in order to transport the light to the
moon are vessels of pure light, being made from the New Paradise which was built by the Great Builder.
particles of light completely unaffected by dark- This process frightens the powers of darkness and,
ness. The planets and stars, however, are evil rulers, in a desperate attempt to preserve some of the cap-
because they are created from material contami- tive particles of light, they create the first human
nated with darkness. couple: Adam and Eve. Hence man was made by
The world being thus constructed as a well- the demons. He was created, however, after the

--- Page 187 ---
763 MANICHAEISM
image of the Third Messenger (and so ultimately mingling, being the present world time; and future
after the image of God!) which the demons had time in which the two kingdoms will again (and
seen on high. Man is thus rooted in two worlds, but now definitively) be separated. In essence this mes-
at first he is unconscious of his high descent, sage of salvation is typically gnostic: the Nous (the
because the necessary gnosis is still missing. This heavenly revelation) rescues the Psyche (the divine
explains why the work of the redemption of light spark of light in man) from Hyle (evil matter).
must be concentrated on man. Thus Jesus the
Luminous descends to Adam to bring him the sav- 6. SALVATION AND ETHICS
ing knowledge. In Manichaeism, this revelation is On the basis of its complicated myth alone, it
the archetype of all future human redemption. would be difficult to understand the success of
Gradually the liberation will be achieved. In order Manzi’s religion. In fact, the elaborate myth was
to bring about the redemption of light, Jesus evokes only of minor importance to Manichaeans and its
the Light Mind or Nous (Intelligence); and this relevance was sometimes even played down. What
Nous, in turn, summons forth the Apostle of Light really interested both the Hearers and the Elect was
who becomes incarnate in the great religious lead- the microcosmic significance of the macrocosmic
ers throughout world history, such as the Buddha, drama. Indeed, the long-term imprisonment of
Zoroaster, and Jesus the Messiah. light by matter in the physical universe had impor-
The final stage of world history is introduced by tant practical consequences for those who had been
the Great War between the forces of good and evil. illuminated by the Nous. Their duty was to be
Through the practice of the laws of the true reli- instruments for the liberation of the divine light.
gion, light is liberated. When the Church of the Carrying out this liberation required from the
righteous ones triumphs, every soul will be judged, individual both a conscious effort to promote
and those of the chosen will rise to heaven. After virtue, and the avoidance of any action which
that, the world will be destroyed and purified by a might harm the light or prolong its captivity. The
fire lasting 1468 years. All, or most, of the light Manichaean Elect were therefore expected to
particles will be saved; evil matter, in all its mani- observe “the five commandments”: 1. truthfulness,
festations and with its victims (the damned), will be 2. non-injury, 3. chastity, 4. purity of the mouth,
forever imprisoned in a globe (Bélos, globus) inside and 5. poverty. From Augustine and from Iranian
a gigantic pit covered with a huge stone. Then the and Turkish sources as well, it is known that the
separation of light and darkness will have been Manichaean ethic which was binding upon the
accomplished for all eternity. Elect was more generally summarized as the “three
This is a necessarily brief and — inevitably — eclec- seals” (tria signacula): the seal of the mouth; the
tic account of the complicated myth. The most seal of the hands; and the seal of the bosom. For the
coherent description of Manichaean cosmogony Hearers, there were ten commandments which
can be found in Theodore bar Koni’s already cited have not been preserved uniformly, but which
Book ofScholia, but his account ends with the cre- encompassed in any case the prohibition of killing,
ation of Adam and Eve. Many other cosmological lying, false accusations, an unchaste life, stealing,
and cosmogonic tenets have been preserved in the and black > magic.
surviving works of the Manichaeans and in the From this it can be inferred that the catechumens
writings of opponents such as Augustine. The lat- were allowed to marry and to carry out normal
ter also includes very interesting passages from daily activities. Their main obligation, however,
Mani’s Treasure of Life in Latin translation (cf. was what is termed in Middle Persian ruwdndgan,
Contra Felicem Il, 5 and De natura boni 44; this “soul-service”. This service consisted of providing
Thesaurus appears to have circulated in Gaul and food, shelter and any other required sustenance for
Spain as well). the Elect, and was the condition for the Hearers’
However complex and arcane the various rami- own redemption: they would be rescued and puri-
fications of the Manichaean myth became during fied according to their works. Although in very
the course of its distribution through many coun- exceptional cases a catechumen (like an Elect) may
tries and centuries, its essential elements remained be directly saved by his or her conduct, asa rule sal-
the same from the Atlantic to the Pacific. It is vation will only take place through a series of rein-
Mani’s doctrine that there are two principles (or carnations in e.g. luminous fruits and, finally, into
roots or kingdoms or realms or cities) and three an Elect. In the Fragmenta Tabestina, the vital
“moments”: the time before the commingling and place of the Hearer in the Manichaean Church is
the struggle, when the two kingdoms of light and illustrated by the New Testament story of Martha
darkness were still separated; the time of the com- and Mary (Luke ro, 38-42): like these two sisters,

--- Page 188 ---
MANICHAEISM 764
the two classes of Elect and Hearers both perform Jewish and Jewish-Christian background. Indeed,
indispensable and complementary tasks in order to any unprejudiced reader of the CMC will be struck
ensure the liberation of light. by its Jewish and (Jewish-)Christian elements. This
The Elect received the Hearers’ daily offerings: in does not, however, exclude the probability that
particular, fruit and bread at “the table”. This Iranian or other religious and philosophical com-
sacred meal, probably the only real sacrament in ponents may well have influenced both the origin
Manichaeism, was opened by the Elect with “an and the subsequent developments of Mani’s reli-
apology to the bread”. Of special importance was gious system. Iranian and perhaps even specifically
the yearly Bema festival to commemorate Mani’s Zoroastrian elements may be identified in his con-
martyrdom. A judgement seat (Béma, tribunal) cept of history as the Three Times, in certain par-
was raised in the middle of the worshipping con- ticular traits of his mythology, in terms such as “the
gregation upon which stood an icon of Mani to cel- Great War”, in the Daéna-concept, or in the desig-
ebrate his continuing presence in the community of nation of the highest God as “the One with four
the Elect, and to symbolize his role as Jesus’ repre- faces”. As regards the last two concepts, however,
sentative until the last judgment. This feast of the reference can be made to Christian and Jewish par-
Bema was preceded by a month of fasting. Other allels as well. That Mani’s concept of the Nous
fast days were Sunday (for the Hearers and the ought to be derived from the Iranian Vohu manah
Elect) and Monday (for the Elect). Fasting was also (as argued by Geo Widengren) seems unlikely in
practised at other times and periods, e.g. during the view of its many substantial equivalents in Hel-
five nocturnal festivals, each of which encom- lenistic thinking. From Buddhism, Mani may have
passed a day and a night. Ritual prayer had its received impulses resulting in the radical division
place within these fasts, as well as during the daily of his Church into Elect and Hearers and to his
services, together with hymns, reading of scripture doctrine of metempsychosis. Besides these possible
and, for instance, sermons and catechetical lessons. “sources”, much influence was doubtlessly exerted
The ritual greetings and blessings that Mani intro- by the radical gnostic > Marcion. Major formative
duced into his Church were seen as reenactments of elements of Mani’s system, particularly of his cos-
divine archetypes: the “peace” (the first greeting), mology, may well have been inspired by Bardesanes
the giving of the right hand, the kiss, the “saluta- (t 222). If the latter is to be treated not so much as
tion” (proskynesis), and the laying on of hands. a gnostic, but as a typical representative of plural-
istic Syriac Christianity, then this again indicates
7. ORIGINS certain backgrounds of Mani in Edessene Chris-
The origins of Manichaeism are still open to tendom. Apart from these and other possible
question. For centuries this religion was assumed “sources”, however, Mani has to be evaluated first
to be a Christian heresy. As we have seen, Augus- and foremost as the founder of an independent and
tine called Mania ‘Persian’, and until recently it has unique gnostic world religion.
been common in the history of religions to treat
Manichaeism primarily as part of the religious his- For a virtually complete overview of primary and
secondary sources, see G.B. Mikkelsen, Bibliographiatory of Iran. This view seemed to be corroborated
Manichaica (Corpus Fontium Manichaeorum
by the finds at Turfan and Tun-huang. However,
[= CFM], Subsidia I), Brepols: Turnhout, 1997 ¢ H.J.
with the discovery of original Manichaean texts in Polotsky (ed., trans.), Manichdische Homilien: Mani-
Coptic, the scholarly consensus concerning the chaische Handschriften der Sammlung A. Chester
general character of Manichaeism has changed. Beatty, Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1934 ¢ C.R.C. All-
Manichaeism now appears to have firm roots in a berry (ed., trans.), A Manichaean Psalm-Book, Part II,
Gnostic type of Christianity. This view has been Manichaean Manuscripts of the Chester Beatty Collec-
tion II, Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1938 ¢ H.J. Polotsky
convincingly demonstrated by the Cologne Mani
& A. Bohlig (eds., trans.), Kephalaia, Band I, vol. 1,
Codex. According to this Codex, some of the Jew-
Manichdische Handschriften der Staatlichen Museen
ish-Christian Elchasaites among whom the young Berlin, Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1940 # M. Boyce
Mani lived regarded him as a prophet, and some (ed., trans.), The Manichaean Hymn-Cycles in
even said that the Living Word spoke through him Parthian (London Oriental Studies 3), London etc.:
(CMC 86). There is reason for the assumption that Oxford University Press, 1954 # A. Bohlig (ed., trans.),
at that time Mani shared their Jewish-Christian Kephalaia, Band I, vol. 2, Lieferung 11/12, Manichdi-
sche Handschriften der Staatlichen Museen Berlin,
convictions and believed that he was the new incar-
Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1966 # A. Adam (ed.), Texte
nation of the true prophet.
zum Manichdismus, Berlin: De Gruyter, 19697 ¢
In recent research, several other tenets of W. Sundermann (ed., trans.), Mittelpersische und
Manichaeism have been re-interpreted against this parthische kosmogonische und Parabeltexte der

--- Page 189 ---
765 MARCION
Manichder, Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1973 # P. Zieme of Manichaean Studies, 1995 ¢ For other sources (e.g.
(ed., trans.), Manichdisch-tiirkische Texte, Berlin: the Cologne Mani Codex) and lit., see > Mani.
Akademie Verlag, 1975 # A. Bohlig (trans.), Die
Gnosis, Il, Der Manichdismus, Ziirich & Minchen: JOHANNES VAN OORT
Artemis Verlag, 1980 ¢ W. Sundermann (ed., trans.),
Mitteliranische manichdische Texte kirchengeschicht-
lichen Inhalts, Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1981 ¢ Marcion,* ca 85 Pontus, ¢ ca. 160 place
W. Sundermann (ed., trans.), Der Sermon vom Licht- unknown
Nous: Eine Lebrschrift des dstlichen Manichdismus,
Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1992 « H.J. Klimkeit Marcion was a shipowner and maritime mer-
(trans.), Gnosis on the Silk Road: Gnostic Texts from
chant from Pontus (according to Epiphanius,
Central Asia, San Francisco: Harper, 1993 ¢ A. Villey
(trans.), Psaumes des errants: Ecrits manichéens du Panarion, 42, 1, 3, from Sinope on the Black Sea
Fayyum, Paris: Editions du Cerf, 1994 ¢ I. Gardner coast) and the most successful Christian heretic of
(trans.), The Kephalaia of the Teacher, Leiden: E.J. the 2nd century. He founded a counterchurch for
Brill, 1995 # G. Wurst (ed., trans.), The Manichaean which he claimed divine truth and catholicity
Coptic Papyri in the Chester Beatty Library: Psalm- against the emerging “great church”. The Mar-
book, Part. II, Fasc. 1, Die Bema-Psalmen (CFM,
cionite community survived until the 3rd century in
Series Coptica I, Pars I, vol. 1), Brepols: Turnhout,
the West, the 4th century in most of the East, and
1996 # W. Sundermann (ed., trans.), Der Sermon von
der Seele: Eine Lehrschrift des dstlichen Manichdis- for a still longer period in Syria. It was a dangerous
mus, Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1997 ¢ S.G. Richter rival for orthodox Christianity until the middle of
(ed., trans.), The Manichaean Coptic Papyri in the the 3rd century.
Chester Beatty Library: Psalmbook, Part. II, Fasc. 2, According to our best sources Marcion came to
Die Herakleides-Psalmen (CFM, Series Coptica I, Pars Rome about 140, probably not yet baptized, joined
Il, vol. 2), Brepols: Turnhout, 1998 « W.-P. Funk (ed.,
the Christian congregation there and gave it as a
trans.), Kephalaia, Band I, vol. 2, Lieferung 13-14/
present the large sum of 200.000 sestertii, perhaps 15-16, Manichdische Handschriften der Staatlichen
Museen Berlin, Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1999/2000 ¢ the proceeds from selling his ship. A few years of
H.G. Schipper & J. van Oort (ed., trans.), St. Leo the bitter quarrels about the right understanding of the
Great: Sermons and Letters against the Manichaeans Christian message must have followed. When the
(CFM, Series Latina I), Turnhout: Brepols, 2000 ¢ majority of the Roman Christians turned against
Z. Gulacsi, Manichaean Art in Berlin Collections Marcion, he broke away and founded his own
(CFM, Series Archaeologica et Iconographica I), Turn-
church (about 144). He immediately started a
hout: Brepols, 2001 @ F. Decret & J. van Oort (Latin
powerful missionary campaign. It led towards a text, trans.), St. Augustinus: Acta contra Fortunatum
Manichaeum (CFM, Series Latina II), Turnhout: serious crisis of the Catholic Church, which it took
Brepols, 2004. some 50 years to overcome. Another tradition
(Epiphanius, Panarion 42, 1, 4-7, and later
Lit.: F. Decret, Mani et la tradition manichéenne, Paris: authors) tells us that Marcion was excommuni-
Editions du Seuil, 1974 ¢ R.E. Emmerick et al. (eds.), cated by his own father, who was bishop of Sinope,
Studia Manichaica, Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 2000 ¢ for seducing a virgin, and was already rebuked for
S.N.C. Lieu, Manichaeism in the Later Roman Empire
his teaching in Asia Minor before he came to
and Medieval China, Tibingen: Mohr, 1992? ¢ S.N.C.
Lieu, Manichaeism in Mesopotamia and the Roman Rome. These are obviously antiheretical legends.
West, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1994 # S.N.C. Lieu, Mani- The heart of Marcion’s teaching is his assump-
chaeism in Central Asia and China, Leiden: E.J. Brill, tion of two gods, existing alongside each other. It is
1998 @ P. Mirecki & J. BeDuhn (eds.), Emerging from not a dualism of equal balance. Firstly, there is the
Darkness, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1997 # J. van Oort et al., good god who is described as the absolute, perfect
eds., Augustine and Manichaeism in the Latin West,
and almighty god of ancient philosophy, who is
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2001 # N.A. Pedersen, Demonstra-
also the god of life and mercy. He is unknown to the
tive Proof in Defense of God: A Study of Titus of
Bostra’s Contra Manichaeos, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2004 other god and to the world, until he decides to
H.-Ch. Puech, Le manichéisme: Son fondateur, sa doc- reveal himself in Christ. The other god is the Demi-
trine, Paris: Civilisations du Sud, 1949 ¢ J.C. Reeves, urge, the creator god of the Old Testament with all
Jewish Lore in Manichaean Cosmogony, Cincinnati: his anthropomorphic features of wrath, remorse
Hebrew Union College Press, 1992 # J.C. Reeves, Her- and self-contradiction, ‘a judge, fierce and warlike’
alds of that Good Realm, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1996 ¢
(Tertullian, Adversus Marcionem, I, 6, 1). He has
S.G. Richter, Die Aufstiegspsalmen des Herakleides,
created the world and the human race, both reflect- Wiesbaden: Reichert Verlag, 1997 # M. Tardieu, Le
manichéisme, Paris: PUF, 1981 (= 1997*) # A. van ing the imperfection of their maker in their own
Tongerloo & J. van Oort (eds.), The Manichaean nature. Out of weakness humanity fell into sin and
NOUS, Lovanii-Ultraiecti: International Association was from now on threatened by the Demiurge with

--- Page 190 ---
MARCION 766
his relentless law of vengeance. The assumption of tradition is a new achievement. Marcion denies
two gods of different standing and power is com- that the Old Testament is to be understood as a
mon Gnostic teaching. Marcion, however, juxta- Christian book: it is a true book in a historical
poses his gods as having coexisted from the sense, but a book in which the Demiurge addresses
beginning. The good god is not the principle of the Jews. Christological interpretation is rejected.
being, difficult though this may be to accept. The Having lost the Old Testament basis for his theol-
antagonism of Marcion’s gods explains the dualism ogy, Marcion had to look for Christian sources for
of his whole doctrine. Although there is no link his teaching. He discovered that both oral and writ-
whatever connecting him with the creator’s realm, ten tradition had suffered judaizing interpolations
the good god out of mere love and mercy for in the church since the time of the apostles. General
humankind suffering under the regime of the appeals to tradition were no longer sufficient. Mar-
creator sends Christ into the world to save all cion had to find written documents the origin of
those who believe in him (Tertullian, Adv. Marc., I, which could be traced. He eventually found such
Li hy 7A). evidence in the Gospel of Luke and in the Pauline
Marcion is a strict docetist: Christ is not born corpus, which was circulating in several collec-
from a woman but comes down from the heaven of tions. From the beginning of the letter to the Gala-
the good god as an adult person in the 15th year of tians Marcion learned that Paul was the only
the emperor Tiberius (29 A.D.). The substance of apostle who had remained steadfast in the truth
his body resembles that of the angels. He preaches and had never forsaken Christ (Gal. 2, 11-14). And
the gospel of the good god to all human beings, when Paul mentioned the one gospel he had
offering redemption from the creator’s law and received from Christ, Marcion referred this to
judgment to all who believe in him and his father. Luke. Even the Pauline corpus and the Gospel were
Christ gives his own life to the Demiurge as the not free from judaizing additions. Marcion had to
price for liberation of the believers (Marcion is the eliminate them in order to produce reliable texts.
first Christian theologian to hold a “ransom” the- Marcion opened a new era in the history of the bib-
ory of redemption). He takes their souls up into the lical canon: his abandoning of the Old Testament
heaven of his father; the material bodies cannot forced him to create a canon of New Testament-
enter the heavenly realm. The doctrine of Christ’s writings. The Catholic Church reacted to this with
descent to the underworld is of particular impor- its twofold Bible, which keeps the Old Testament
tance for Marcion: as the good god did not reveal and contains a greater number of New Testament
himself before the coming of Christ, his preaching books. We know about four works written or
to the souls of the dead is the unique chance for revised by Marcion: 1. the Gospel, 2. the Apostoli-
them to hear the gospel and to believe. Indeed, the con, 3. a letter in which he admitted that he had
pagans and the sinners of the Old Testament follow once been a member of the Catholic Church (Ter-
him immediately, while the holy persons of the tullian, De carne Christi, 2, 4; Adv. Marc., I, 1, 6;
Hebrew bible, who belong to the Demiurge, do not IV, 4, 3) and 4. the Antithesis, which presented
trust Christ and stay behind (Irenaeus, Adversus Marcion’s theology; the opposing statements of
Haereses, 1, 27, 3). law and gospel were to show the diversity of the
The Demiurge will also send his son, the Messiah gods. What is the attitude of Marcion towards
of the Old Testament. He has not yet come. He will Gnosticism and esotericism? It has been said above
be a warrior and reestablish the kingdom of the that Marcion’s teaching of the two gods and the
Jews (Tertullian, Adv. Marc. II, 21-24). The resulting dualism appear very Gnostic. Concerning
period between the resurrection of Christ and his the understanding of tradition and esotericism
second coming is a time of suffering for the Christ- however, there is a sharp contrast. Gnosticism is
ian believers because they are hated and persecuted intrinsically an esoteric movement. Its teaching is
by the creator god. When Christ comes again, he not addressed to the pagans or ordinary Christians
will not judge the sinners himself, but will hand in a general way: it is directed to the elect, to those
them over to the creator to judge and punish them. who participate in the heavenly spirit (pneuma)
(Tertullian, Adv. Marc., 1, 27, 6-28, 1; II, 11, 3). without knowing. Those who believe in the Gnos-
Perhaps after this has happened the creator with his tic myth hereby prove to be elected, which
adherents and with his whole world will perish in the unbelievers are obviously not. A favorite
his own fire (Harnack, 140f.). literary form for communicating esoteric lore is
Marcion’s dualistic teaching can be understood the preaching of Christ after his resurrection to
as radical > Gnosticism, including influence from a select group of disciples. The secret teaching
contemporary philosophy. His view of Christian could also be said to be transmitted by little known

--- Page 191 ---
767 MARCION
teachers of the past (cf. Hippolytus, Refutatio VII, 2, 2f.). Both versions show that Apelles and his
20, I) or even claimed to be “apostolic tradition” school tried to come closer to the catholic doctrine
(Ptolemy, Epistula ad Floram, in Epiphanius, of the true body of Christ. On earth Christ suffered
Panarion, 33, 7, 9). Marcion dismissed oral and died; after his resurrection he returned to his
tradition and never referred to apocryphal writ- father, giving back the elements of his body during
ings; he did not distinguish classes of Christians the ascent.
according to their spiritual progress either. For him In Rome Apelles was connected with a pro-
faith was the only condition of salvation. He phetess, Filumene. He put her sayings together
preached the one truth of the gospel to everybody, in a book Phaneroseis (“Manifestations”). Perhaps
not only to an advanced spiritual elite. Marcion is Apelles added these revelations to the Marcionite
the least esoteric Christian thinker of his time. The canon. This would explain a certain distance
Marcionite church was a well-organized body with between Marcionites and Apelleians. Rhodon, a
bishops, presbyters and deacons. Members called catholic writer of the late 2nd century, tells us that
themselves Markidnistai. Marcion was highly hon- Apelles as an old man declared that for a Christian
oured in his church. He was said to sit on the left of nothing matters but faith in the crucified Christ and
Christ in heaven with Paul sitting on the right (Ori- good works (Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., V, 13, 5). One
gen, Hom. in Luc. 25 [ed. Rauer, 162, 6f.]), and he must beware not to understand this statement in
was called “the bishop” (Adamantius, De recta in modern terms of subjective faith. Apelles is still
deum fide, I, 8 [ed. van de Sande Bakhuyzen, quoted and criticized in the 4th century. His school
16, 34]). had vanished much earlier.
After Marcion’s death theological schools devel-
oped in western Marcionitism. They discussed the A. Rousseau & L. Doutreleau et al. (eds.), Irénée de
number and nature of the principles of being Lyon: Contre les Hérésies I-V (SC 100, 152-153, 210-
(archai). Two, three and four principles were 211, 263-264, 293-294), Paris: Les Editions du Cerf,
1965-1982 ¢ E. des Places (ed.), Numénius: Frag-
assumed. It seems to have been a deliberate attempt
ments, Paris: Société d’Edition Les Belles Lettres, 1973
at reaching a deeper philosophical understanding ¢ Tertullian, Opera I-II (CC, ser. Lat., I, II), Turnhout:
of Marcion’s doctrine. Similar ways of thought Brepols, 1954 # E. Evans (ed. & trans.), Tertullian:
were pursued outside Marcionitism as well. Dis- Adversus Marcionem (Oxford Early Christian Texts),
putes took place both within Marcionite circles 2 vols., Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972 ¢ R. Braun &
and with teachers from outside (cf. Rhodon, in: C. Moreschini (eds.), Tertullien: Contre Marcion I-IV
(SC 365. 368. 399. 456), Paris: Les Editions du Cerf,
Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica, V 13; Hippolytus,
1990-2001 ¢@ K. Holl (ed.), Epiphanius II: Panarion
Refutatio, X, 19, 1-3). The most important pupil of
haer. 34-64, 2nd rev. ed. by J. Dummer, Berlin:
Marcion was Apelles, (ca. 120-ca. 185), head of a Akademie Verlag, 1980 ¢ F. Williams (trans.), The
school in Rome. In contrast to his teacher he taught Panarion of Epiphanius of Salamis, Book I (Sects 1-46)
one absolute god of perfect goodness. This god cre- (Nag Hammadi Studies 35), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1987.
ated angelic powers. The first angel created the
world with an imperfect result. A second angel Lit.: B. Aland, “Marcion/Marcioniten”, TRE 22
(1992), 89-r0r # E.C. Blackman, Marcion and his
turned away from the supreme god and persuaded
influence, London: S.P.C.K., 1948 @ H. Freiherr von
the preexistent souls to come down to the lower Campenhausen, Die Entstehung der christlichen Bibel
world to put on flesh. The next angel is fury (like a (Beitrage zur historischen Theologie 39), Tubingen:
demon), he is the god of the Jews who spoke to > Mohr, 1968 @ K. Greschat, Apelles und Hermogenes:
Moses from the burning bush. This angel inspired zwei theologische Lehrer des zweiten Jahrhunderts
the Old Testament, which is a book full of lies and (Supplements to Vigiliae Christianae 48), Leiden,
contradictions. Apelles dedicated a voluminous Boston, Koln: E.J. Brill, 2000 # A. von Harnack, Mar-
cion: Das Evangelium vom fremden Gott, Leipzig:
work, called Syllogisms, to this topic. On the
Hinrichs: 1921, 1924 (2., verbesserte und vermehrte
request of the creator-angel the supreme god sent Auflage) (classical monograph, collection of sources) ¢
Christ to the world to save the human souls. For his J. Knox, Marcion and the New Testament: An essay on
appearance on earth Christ needed a body. There the History of the Canon, Chicago: Univ. of Chicago
are two descriptions of its making. The first is that Press, 1980 (Reprint of the 1942 edition) ¢ G. May,
when Christ descended through the celestial “Marcion in Contemporary Views: Results and
Open Questions”, The Second Century 6 (1987/88),spheres he weaved for himself a body out of the ele-
129-151 ¢ idem, “Der ‘Schiffsreeder’ Marcion”, Studia
ments of the stars (Tertullian, De carne Christi, 6,
Patristica 21 (1989), 142-153 @ idem et al. (eds.),
1-3, 8); the second is that Christ fabricated his body Marcion und seine kirchengeschichtliche Wirkung —
on earth out of the terrestrial matter (Hippolytus, Marcion and his Impact on Church History (Texte und
Refutatio, VII, 38, 3-5; Epiphanius, Panarion, 44, Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der altchristlichen

--- Page 192 ---
MARCION 768
Literatur, 150), Berlin-New York: de Gruyter, 2002 ¢ brothers. Marconis had belonged in 1833 to a
C. Moreschini, “Temi e motivi della polemica antimar- Parisian Misraim lodge, where a conflict with other
cionita di Tertulliano”, Studi classici e orientali 17 members caused his expulsion. Nevertheless, in
(1968), 149-186 # E. Norelli, “La funzione di Paolo 1836 a certain “Monsieur de Négre” was able to
nel pensiero di Marcione”, Rivista Biblica 34 (1996),
open a new lodge in Lyon, “La Bienveillance”,
543-597 @ G. Quispel, De Bronnen van Tertullianus’
Aduersus Marcionem, Utrecht: Burgersdijk & Nie- armed with an authentic patent from the Parisian
man, 1943 ¢ J. Regul, Die antimarcionitischen Evan- authorities, until the discovery in 1838 of his true
gelienprologe (Vetus Latina: Aus der Geschichte der identity and of the irregularity of the rituals he was
lateinischen Bibel 6), Herder: Freiburg 1969 ¢ practicing caused a fresh expulsion. It was in these
U. Schmid, Marcion und sein Apostolos: Rekonstruk- contentious circumstances that he founded his own
tion und historische Einordnung der Marcionitischen
organization in the same year, and carried on an
Paulusbriefausgabe (Arbeiten zur Neutestamentlichen
endless polemic with the Bédarrides. Textforschung 25), Berlin, New York: Walter de
Gruyter, 1995 @ K. Tsutsui, “Das Evangelium Mar- Mistrust of public authorities and of the forms of
cions: Ein neuer Versuch der Textrekonstruktion”, Freemasonry recognized by them accentuated the
Annual of the Japanese Biblical Institute 18 (1992), secret character of both Memphis and Misraim,
67-132. justifying their insistence on mythical origins as
proof of their legitimacy. The Grand Hierophant
GERHARD MAY appropriated the legend that the Templars had
inherited their knowledge from the “Brothers of
Marconis de Négre, Jacques-Etienne,* the Orient”, an order founded by the Egyptian sage
30.1.1795 Montauban (Tarn et Ormuz, converted to Christianity by St. Mark, and
Garonne), + 21.11.1868 Paris whose transmission had taken place in secret [>
Neo-Templar Traditions]. All the knowledge of
The founder of the “Egyptian” masonic rite masonry was placed under the auspices of esoteri-
of Memphis (1838) was also one of the first cism, a veritable mystery within the mysteries:
theoreticians and employers of the word ésoté- ‘That is why the masonic science, the science par
risme (> esotericism). His family seems to have excellence, is both esoteric and exoteric, the eso-
been marked by the double origin reflected in his tericism being its thought, the exotericism its
name; his father Gabriel-Matthieu Marconis is said power...’ (Le Sanctuaire . . ., 17). Marconis nev-
to have been an Italian officer in Napoleon’s army ertheless succeeded in integrating the Grand Orient
in Egypt, while the patronym “de Négre” is current of France in 1862, at the moment when Marshall
in South/West France. This was the region where Magnan (1791-1865) was attempting to unify all
Marconis Sr., together with a certain “Brother” the masonic obediences under his authority; he had
Honis of Cairo, founded, on April 30, 1815 in taken advantage of the refusal of Misraim. Mem-
Montauban, a Grand Egyptian Lodge called “Les phis had a genuinely international influence. From
Disciples de Memphis”. Since this rite was dupli- 1859, French emigrant lodges functioned for a time
cated by that of Misraim, of which Gabriel- in London; and Marconis made a voyage in 1856-
Matthieu was Grand Master, the lodge was “put to 1857 to New York, where he created a Sovereign
sleep” in the following year and not reawakened Grand Council of which Harry J. Seymour became
until 1838 by his son. Jacques-Etienne soon Grand Master in 1861. In 1863-1864, another one
became its “Grand Hierophant”, a new grade (the was established in Alexandria, Egypt. It was
96th!) created on this occasion. He was an excel- through the intermediacy of Seymour that the Eng-
lent connoisseur of masonic rituals, and worked a lish occultist mason John Yarker re-established a
synthesis of Misraim with the Ancient and Sovereign Grand Sanctuary in 1872.
Accepted Scottish Rite, explaining and justifying it
in two works: L’Hiérophante, développements J.E. Marconis de Négre & E.N. Mouttet, L’Hiéro-
phante, développements complets des mystéres macon-
complets des mystéres maconniques (The hiero-
niques, Vallée de Paris, 5839 (1839) ¢ Le Sanctuaire de
phant, complete expositions of the masonic mys- Memphis ou Hermes, développements complets des
teries, 1839) and Le Sanctuaire de Memphis ou mysteres magonniques, Paris: Bruyer 1849 ¢ Le Soleil
Hermes (The sanctuary of Memphis or Hermes, mystique, journal de la magonnerie universelle, Paris,
1849). Especially in the latter, he underlined the 1853.
concordances with ancient masonic initiations
Lit.: Ellic Howe, “The Rite of Memphis in France and
such as the Primitive Rite of Narbonne, and
England, 1838-1870”, Ars Quatuor Coronatorum 92,
clarified and simplified the rituals of Misraim, a rite 1979 # Gérard Galtier, Magonnerie égyptienne, Rose-
established in Paris in 1814-1815 by the Bédarride Croix et néo-chevalerie: Les fils de Cagliostro,

--- Page 193 ---
769 MARCUS THE MAGICIAN
Monaco: Editions du Rocher, 1989 @ Jean-Pierre Lau- view, that he was endowed with an uncommon
rant, L’ésotérisme chrétien en France au XIX°® siecle, hypnotic talent. The “seed of light”, which was
Lausanne: LAge d’Homme, 1990 ¢ Eric Saunier (ed.), also a vehicle for the prophetic spirit (cf. Delphic
Encyclopédie de la franc-maconnerie, Paris: La
Pythia, insufflated by Apollo), entered the over-
pochothéque, 2000, 745-746.
excited aspiring prophetess — who yearned to
“restore unity” — through her most natural orifice
JEAN-PIERRE LAURANT
by a procedure that might be seen as similar to the
well-known rituals of left-hand tantrism. Marcus
Marcus the Magician, 2nd century (who identified himself with the syzygos angel of
the Valentinian Pleroma) and his Gnostic and
Marcus the Magician was a Gnostic [-> Gnos- pneumatic female followers materialized the sym-
ticism] and a disciple of Valentinus who claimed bol and drew extreme consequences (a sort of real-
a right to correct his teacher. The dates of his birth ized eschatology) from the Valentinian sacrament
and death are unknown, but his floruit can con- of the bridal chamber (nymphon) — a sacrament
ceivably be located between 160 and 180 AD. which gave a (merely symbolical!) foretaste of the
Probably he was a native of Asia Minor, an ancient copulation (realized in the Pleroma) between the
centre of diffusion of Christianity, in particular of spiritual and his/her angel — thereby restoring
Gnostic Christianity, and he presumably carried the androgynous unity broken by Sophia’s sin. In
out his propaganda missions in the Rhone valley. A addition, to have success also with those women
presence of Marcosians — his disciples — is attested who were less easily influenced by his psychic pow-
in the diocese of Lyons and later in Rome itself ers, Marcus made use of erotic potions based on
(Hippolytus). The treatise Adversus haereses, I, 13- well-known recipes taken from the magic papyri.
16, by Irenaeus, bishop of Lyons, is the direct or According to heresiologists, of course, the use of
indirect source of all the subsequent heresiological magic arts — particularly aphrodisiac potions — was
information available in the Greek, Latin and Syr- to be imputed to the Gnostic groups that were most
iac languages, with the partial exception of the rit- suspected of libertine attitudes, i.e. the Simonians
ual of apolytrosis (redemption, in this case a second (Irenaeus, AH, I, 23. 4), the Basilideans (I, 24, 5)
baptism) described by Hippolytus of Rome (Refu- and the — Carpocratians\(I;-25. 3). Irenaeus
tatio, V1, 41; the reports contained in the Arabic testifies, and there is no reason to disbelieve him,
World History by Agapius, the Melchite bishop that in his own diocese a large number of women
of Hierapolis in Syria, are unreliable and of little had fallen prey to the seductive arguments — reli-
consequence). gious and erotic — put forward by Marcosian mis-
Marcus placed special emphasis on the ritual sionaries. The special sacrament they received
aspects of (mainly oriental) Valentinianism. The before dying — the so-called “redemption” (apoly-
basic sacrament with which he used to initiate his trosis), a kind of second baptism or chrism or
followers — women, in particular, who flocked to extreme unction — made them perfect and conse-
him captivated by his charismatic personality — quently free from the risks of the afterlife, i.e. the
consisted in the manipulation of wine in cups, by verdict pronounced by the supreme court presided
practices that according to Irenaeus (AH, I, 13, 2) over by the Demiurge (Achamoth’s son) in the
were nothing but a parody of the Catholic ritual of lower skies.
the Eucharist. White wine changed to red — fertil- In Irenaeus’ and Hippolytus’ opinion, however,
ized by the blood of the superior female aeon Grace the most distinctive feature of the Marcosian sect
(Charis) — or it increased prodigiously in volume was its speculation on letters and numbers (in
thanks to the skills that Marcus — the accomplished terms of neopythagorean arithmology [~ Number
alchemist and conjuror — displayed in the presence Symbolism] and Graeco-Jewish gematria), re-
of an astonished female audience. The second step ported as a sequence of visionary revelations attrib-
consisted in inculcating the charisma of prophecy uted to various entities of the Pleroma. The first
(glossolalia?) in his faithful to allow them to par- teaching that the Tetrad, in female shape, imparts
take of the gifts of Grace, the aeon with which he to Marcus is a meditation on the letters that com-
enjoyed a privileged relationship (“Take Grace pose the names of the Father and other members of
from me through me... open your mouth and the Pleroma. The Tetrad’s second speech consists in
prophesy’). Irenaeus reports that Marcus, to translating the body of the aeon Truth into the let-
achieve his objective, availed himself of the magical ters of the alphabet: two letters of the Greek alpha-
powers of a helping daemon (paredros). It is there- bet, starting either from alpha or omega, are
fore presumable, from an ethnopsychiatric point of correlated with each of the limbs. The Tetrad’s

--- Page 194 ---
MARCUS THE MAGICIAN 77°
third and longest speech is also the most elaborate: A. Wypustek, “Un aspect ignoré des persecutions des
gematric interpretations of the names of Jesus, chrétiens dans l’antiquité: Les accusations de magie ero-
tique imputées aux chrétiens aux II et III siécles”, Jabr-
Christ and other personages of the Pleroma are
buch fiir Antike und Christentum 42 (1999), 50-71.
interspersed with musicological, Christological
and cosmological speculations. Only the female
GIOVANNI CASADIO
components of the Supreme Tetrad (Silence and
Truth) show themselves; but since revelation is the
work of the Tetrad as a whole, the male aeons Martinism: First Period
(First Father and Intellect) must consequently
be regarded as invisibly present. Marcus is the To kes D OG TiRe Nee EDre Crue:
privileged recipient of a visionary revelation issued 3. [THE LEGACY
by a dyad that behaves in a paradoxical fashion,
considering that Truth is always silent while Silence The title of - Papus’s work Martinésisme,
talks too much. Similar grammatological and Willermosisme, Martinisme et Franc-Maconnerie
gematric speculations, in theurgic terms, can be (Martinesism, Willermozism, Martinism, and
found in the treatise Marsanes (NHC X. 1), which Freemasonry, 1899) encompasses fairly exactly
characteristically presents itself in the form of an what modern historiography understands under
apocalypse attributed to Marsanes, a Gnostic the name of “Martinism”, at least for the period of
prophet and visionary who must have been no its origins and early developments (1 8th-beginning
stranger to the circles of Valentinus’ Marcosian of the roth century). The expression “Second Mar-
followers. tinism” applies to the history of the Martinist
Rather like his gnostic ancestor > Simon Magus Order as “re-awakened”, as Papus put it — though
and the contemporary pagan Alexander of in fact he founded it — in 1887 [> Martinism: Sec-
Abonutheichos, Marcus is represented as a power- ond Period]. The term “Martinism” refers in part
ful, charismatic figure, perhaps even a charlatan, to — Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin, but much
with his magic tricks, visionary claims, entre- more to + Martines de Pasqually, the master in
preneurial usage of syncretism and skill in attract- matters of thought, action, prayer, and ritual of all
ing well-educated religious women. In conclusion, those who constitute the type of esotericism thus
Marcus’ heritage can be envisaged immediately in named. This company, apparently heterogeneous
medieval Merkabah literature (esp. Sh?ur Oomah: but basically united, is sufficiently profiled to dis-
angels as letters that reproduce the structure of the tinguish it from the other currents of thought of the
human body) and in perspective in contemporary 18th century, even when those currents take on ini-
pseudo-scientific cults founded by personages like tiatic forms (namely masonic ones), and to arouse
Ron Hubbard (> Scientology), Bhagwan Raj- contrasting reactions, now as then.
neesh, or Claude Vorilhon called Raél.
1. THE DOCTRINE
A. Rousseau & L. Doutreleau (eds.), Irénée de Lyon, In the beginning was Martines de Pasqually,
Contre les hérésies, L. I, Paris: Les editions du Cerf,
and above all his doctrine: this is what defines
1979, vol. 2, 189-265 (text with French translation), vol.
“Martinism”. This doctrine is a gnosis, i.e, a I, 239-261 (notes) ¢ M. Simonetti (ed.), Testi gnostici
in lingua greca e latina, Roma-Milano: Fondazione “science” in the esoteric sense of the word, on
Valla-Mondadori, 1993, 345-349 (text with Italian which all Martines’ disciples (Saint-Martin, >
translation),s;00-501 (notes) # N. Forster, Marcus Willermoz, -> de Maistre, among others) are
Magus: Kult, Lehre und Gemeindeleben einer agreed. According to this sense, science is not pred-
valentinianischen Gnostikergruppe, Tibingen: Mohr
icated on the acquisition of learning or knowledge
Siebeck, 1999 (sources with German translation and
(though that aspect is far from absent), but much
commentary).
more on the transformation of the inner being of
Lit.: G. Casadio, “La visione in Marco il Mago e nella the person who devotes himself to it. It is conceived
gnosi di tipo sethiano”, Augustinianum 29 (1989), 123- as spiritually active and operative: a transformative
146 # A. Cosentino, “Il sistema battesimale valentini- science which applies less to objects than to the
ano”, in: G. Sfameni Gasparro (ed.), Destino e salvezza: subject.
tra culti pagani e gnosi cristiana, Cosenza: L. Giordano,
This doctrine is all-encompassing. It is a “hiero-
1998, 131-148 ¢ M. Idel, “Il mondo degli angeli
history”, a sacred History; a history of man and the in forma umana”, Rassegna mensile d’Israel (1997),
1-76 ¢ A.H.B. Logan, “Magi and Visionaries in Gnosti- universe in their mutual relationships and in their
cism”, in: J.W. Drijvers-J.W. Watt (eds), Portraits of relationship to God; a history which is not merely
Spiritual Authority, Leiden: Brill, 1999, 27-44 ¢ descriptive but dynamic, made of actions and re-

--- Page 195 ---
7721 MARTINISM: FIRST PERIOD
actions (or “counter-actions” as Martines called relative to creation, and “quatriple” relative to
them) on the part of both man and God. This emanation, the “quatriple” being moreover pri-
metahistory is not restricted to reportage, to draw- mary in relation to the triple. A complex numerol-
ing up a Natural Table of the Relationships ogy and arithmosophy [-* Number Symbolism]
between God, Man, and the Universe — to cite the derive from this, preserved by all Martines’ disci-
title of a well-known work of Saint-Martin —and of ples. They are found, for example, in the degrees of
their evolution; it is all aimed at the modification of the Régime Ecossais Rectifié as instituted by Jean-
these relationships and, briefly, at their restoration. Baptiste Willermoz.
For these relationships have become degraded, and It is important to note that the terms “emanate”
everything depends on re-establishing them in their and “emanation” have nothing to do with “ema-
original integrity. The history in question, typical nationism”, a form of pantheism found in several
of sacred histories, thus consists of acts of rebellion variants of > Gnosticism. The classic language to
of man against God, and of God’s interventions for which Martines, for all his awkwardness and idio-
the punishment of man, followed by his reconcilia- syncracy of expression, pays tribute, implies noth-
tion — his punishment being intended to achieve his ing of the sort. E.g. Furetiére in his Dictionnaire
reconciliation. of 1690 defines emanation as “dependance on
Martines’ doctine, and the practice that goes a cause, On a superior power”, giving as an
with it, thus comprise: 1) a cosmology that is also a example: “The rational soul is an emanation of
cosmogony, opening up onto a cosmosophy; Divinity”.
2) an anthropology that is an anthropogenesis and Martines derives an important significance from
also an anthroposophy; 3) a theology that is a this “emanation” in respect to the essence of the
theosophy; 4) an angelology that is an “angelo- “spirits” that are thus perpetually emanated. They
duly”: a cult of, and with, the angels, hence a certainly do not belong to the divine essence,
liturgy. All these are placed under the sign of Wis- because they emanate from it; but still they partici-
dom, or as Saint-Martin would later call it, Sophia. pate in it, because, as Martines states, ‘they have in
At the origin alike of time and of the world there themselves a part of the divine domination’. The
was the Fall, which Martines calls “prevarica- totality of these spirits constitute the “divine
tion” — a term commonly used in the French spirit- immensity”, which is not God. Thus, ‘the fullness
ual school of the classic age. It was a double event: of divinity, but not the Deity, [belongs] to the
a fall or prevarication first of the angels, then of emanated spirits’ (Amadou). This similarity of
man. But there was a history before history, a time essence, which is not identity, recurs in the Régime
before time. In that pre-historic, pre-temporal time, Ecossais Rectifié under the dynamically initiatic
the Eternal (a term that underlines the Creator theme of the “image and resemblance”, Marti-
God’s sovereign exemption from all temporal nesian by origin but accommodated to Chris-
determination) emanates “spirits” in the bosom of tianity, in whose tradition it also figures. Martines
what Martines calls the “divine immensity”. Their also calls the “divine immensity” the “divine
number is infinite, and this “infinity” is not static court”. Like every court, it is hierarchical: the spir-
but dynamic: ‘the multitude of the inhabitants of its are differentiated in “classes” or “circles” which
the divine immensity increases and will increase are ‘distinguished from one another by their
ceaselessly and infinitely, without ever reaching a virtues, their powers, and their names . . . accord-
limit’, since the divine fecundity is uninterrupted: ing to their faculties of divine spiritual operations’.
God never ceases to create. Moreover, although Martines states that ‘this
To be exact, the term “create” is inappropriate famous divine immensity [is] incomprehensible not
here, for Martines reserves it for the production of only to mortals but to every emanated spirit; this.
material and temporal forms, whereas for the knowledge belongs to the Creator alone’, he him-
divine productions on the spiritual plane he uses self has given us his observations about the angelic
the words “emanate” and “emanation”. The dis- hierarchies such as he has contemplated them.
tinction is important, for it leads one to envisage According to a summary by Willermoz, these cir-
the “divine essence” under two different aspects. cles are four in number: ‘to. Circle of superior
The term “essence” is used here following Mar- denary spirits: the agents and special ministers of
tines’ best exegete, Robert Amadou, not in the the universal denary power of the Father, creator of
philosophical sense and even less in the theological all things. 8. Circle of major octonary spirits:
sense, but rather in the chemical or alchemical immediate agents and ministers of the Word of
sense of “species” or of “active nature”. From this God, which is the being of double quaternary
double point of view, this divine essence is “triple” power. 7. Circle of inferior septenary spirits: direct

--- Page 196 ---
MARTINISM: FIRST PERIOD 77%
agents and ministers of the divine operative Action recurrence of an idea common to various forms of
of divine quaternary power and operating the triple + Gnosticism, namely that matter is connoted as
creative essence. 3. Circle of minor ternary spirits: evil. Yet there is an important difference, in that for
agents of manifestation of the divine quatriple Martines matter is not evil in itself; on the contrary,
essence’. it is intended to contain evil and prevent it from
Thus the hierarchy of spirits is a hierarchy of contaminating everything. Moreover, since evil has
functions, which refer to the three Persons of the not a positive but a negative definition, and conse-
Holy Trinity. All the same, Martines explicitly quently has no constituent reality, matter also has
rejects the hypostatic distinction (i.e., that of the none. Matter, just like evil, is destined to disappear
Three Hypostases or divine Persons) on which and disintegrate. Martines keeps repeating that
Christian theology has rested since the dogmatic matter is null and void, that it is only appearance,
formulations of the Council of Nicaea (325). In and that there is no true reality but spiritual reality.
technical terms, he was what is called a “Uni- This is another legacy of Martinesian doctrine to
tarian”, or to be absolutely strict, a “modalist”. the Régime Ecossais Rectifié, found particularly in
For him, the distinction between the “three Persons the Master’s degree.
of God” is more symbolic than real, referring to Matter is created by the operations of the minor
‘three divine faculties which are Thought, Will, and ternary spirits. This is done by setting in motion
Action, or in another sense... the Intention, the a whole series of ternaries or triads that have issued
Word, and the Operation’. These three faculties are by simultaneous or successive combinations from
typified by the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, the first ternary, that of the “spirituous essences”
and also symbolized by Abraham, Isaac, and (“spirituous” in the chemical or alchemical sense,
Jacob. For this reason, these three personages are not to be confused with “spiritual”). These es-
constantly present in the prayers and degrees of the sences themselves have ‘stemmed from the divine
Order of > Elus Coéns. imagination’, whereas spiritual beings, on the con-
This trinitarian theology, which was not so much trary — and the difference is essential — pre-exist in
heterodox as archaistic, or as Amadou says, “pre- God (see above; there is a similarity here with Ori-
Nicaean”, was hardly acceptable to Martines’ dis- gen’s idea of the pre-existence of souls in God).
ciples, all Christians in faith and practice. The These primitive “spirituous essences”, called Salt,
paradox was that Martines insisted, as a condition Sulfur, and Mercury as in the alchemical treatises,
of admission into his Order, on membership of a produce through their mixtures the three elements
church, namely the Roman Catholic Church, of of Water, Fire, and Earth, then, also by mixture, the
which he himself really did not accept one of the three corporeal principles known as “aquatic”,
two fundamental dogmas, that of the Holy Trinity. “igneous”, and “solid”. Consequently Martines
The other one was that of the double nature of assigns symbolically a “triangular form” to the
Christ, which on the contrary he fully embraced. earth, explaining that it ‘has only three noteworthy
Thus one very soon sees his disciples returning, for horizons: north, south, and west’. The lodges of
example in the Legons de Lyon (Lessons of Lyon, the Régime Ecossais Rectifié were also heirs to this.
1774-1776), to a dogmatically orthodox trinitar- The cosmic catastrophe did not fail to have its
ian theology. effect on the “divine court”. The minor ternary
The divine immensity, although in dynamic spirits were obliged to leave it, having been dele-
expansion, was perfect, hence sufficient unto itself. gated by the Eternal first to the creation, then to the
But then a first accident occurred, with the prevar- conservation (see below) of the temporal material
ication of perverse spirits who, wanting to equal universe. And while at the summit of the angelic
the Eternal, strove to become first causes as He hierarchy ‘the divine denary spirits have never left
was, instead of the secondary causes that they the place they occupy in the divine immensity’,
were. They wanted to “operate” like Him, i.e., to other spirits in their turn were ‘subjected to the
emanate. Needless to say, this failed, unleashing a temporal, although they were not at all subject to
cosmic catastrophe in the literal sense of the word. time’ by their own nature: they too are, in effect,
In fact, the Eternal created, or rather ordered the delegated outside this immensity in order to ‘per-
minor spirits who had remained loyal to create, the form... temporal spiritual actions’, or in other
temporal material universe (this being no longer a words to ‘act’and operate in the supercelestial, the
matter of emanation but rather of creation), so as celestial, and the terrestrial’ — the three divisions of
to ‘contain and subject the evil spirits in a state of the created universe (see below) — because they are
privation’ in it; in other words, to imprison the ‘destined to accomplish the temporal manifestation
“prevaricating spirits” therein. Here we find the of the Creator’s justice and glory’. This delegation

--- Page 197 ---
ie) MARTINISM: FIRST PERIOD
outside the divine immensity is called by Martines the Divinity’, Adam ‘in his first state of glory was
“emancipation”, which should in no way be con- the veritable rival of the Creator. As pure spirit, he
fused with “emanation”. There was, is, and will openly read the divine thoughts and operations’.
always be emanation in eternity, or at least in sem- The Creator caused him to perform three opera-
piternity. But emancipation has only occurred tions through which he received the Law, then the
within time, and that only for reasons of circum- Precept, and finally the Commandment. After that,
stance. Thus all the ternary spirits have been eman- the Eternal left him to his free will. Thereupon
cipated in order to attend to the material things of Adam “prevaricated”, in imitation and at the insti-
the universe, as well as a ‘sufficient number’ of gation of the perverse spirits. The latter whispered
septenary spirits, to ‘perform temporal spiritual that he could operate ‘the power of divine creation’
actions in the supercelestial’; and some of them, to inherent in himself. And he in turn found himself,
this end, have been ‘endowed with a denary like them, captive in the material prison of which
power’, because the denary spirits have remained he should have been the jailer. He who should have
in their place. worked to “reconcile” them would henceforth be
A gap would thus seem to have occurred in the at pains to reconcile himself. This possibility had
divine immensity, caused by the departure of the been offered him thanks to the help which which
ternary spirits; but such a gap is intrinsically impos- God, in his tireless mercy, supplied him: namely, by
sible, since ‘there cannot be any void next to the ascetic and religious practice. Adam’s place, left
Creator or in his immensity’. Thus this place was vacant in the center of the supercelestial, awaits the
occupied by a new production, a particularly emi- moment when he will return to be enthroned there:
nent and glorious one: the “minor quaternary spir- ‘it is in this holy place that Adam’s minor spiritual
itual” — quaternary in the image of the Divinity -, posterity must needs be reintegrated’.
namely Man. He was an emanation directly from There remains the fate reserved for another cate-
the Eternal Himself, just as had been the case with gory of spirits, the “octonary” ones. This class,
the other spiritual beings; there was no coopera- being the second in the angelic hierarchy, does not
tion, as was the case with the temporal creation remain in the divine immensity, nor is it eman-
entrusted to the ternary spirits. Man was then the cipated in a specific region. These spirits are
object of a double emancipation. First, the totality assigned to ‘go and operate [the Creator’s] justice
of spiritual beings constituting his class was eman- and glory in the different immensities without dis-
cipated in the “supercelestial”. Then a portion of tinction’. They are as it were the missi dominici
this class was emancipated in the “celestial”, this (divine envoys) charged to bring help to the deserv-
portion being known by the name of “Adam” or ing: ‘the doubly strong spirit is with you when you
“Réau”: a name that is both collective and individ- deserve it, and it departs from you when you make
ual, but more consistently applied to a unique yourself unworthy of its doubly powerful action’.
being containing potentially within itself all of its Their task is to work for reconciliation: in fact, this
spiritual posterity. We are told that this name is a class of spirits ‘will have to work its powerful fac-
pseudonym referring to the nature or state of him ulties eternally in the different classes wherein are
who bears it. For ‘this man-God, in his state of placed the first and the last reconciled ones’.
glory, had his proper name directly attached to his It is necessary to take a closer look at the “three
spiritual being’. Now, in all traditions name is immensities” mentioned above. The indispensable
power. The power of Adam, like his glory, was pre- traveler’s guide — the ‘road-map of the Elus Coéns’
eminent. ‘He received [from the Creator] the (Ama-dou) — is the famous figure universelle,
august name of man-God of the universal earth’, he otherwise called tableau universel, of which several
was ‘the chosen god of the earth’. Man, the last to representations exist (Amadou having published in
arrive of the emanated spiritual beings, was set 1974, 1995, and 1999 the only ones conforming
above them all for two reasons, which were really with the sources). Martines calls it a ‘universal
only one. First, ‘to contain in privation’ the per- figure, in which the whole of the spiritual nature -
verse spirits, to ‘molest’ them, ‘to manifest the major, minor, and inferior — operates’. Equally
divine glory and justice against the prevaricating valuable is the descriptive commentary provided
spirits’; then in order to reconcile them. Their chas- by Willermoz (published by Amadou as Preface to
tisement was not for the sake of punishment, but the Lecons de Lyon, 43-45). A summary follows.
for repentance. Here Martines, again like Origen, The “divine immensity” is ‘this place where the
holds firmly to the idea of apocatastasis. most perfect spiritual beings cannot penetrate, if
‘Created in the image and resemblance of the it is not indeed God himself’ —- and, we might
Omnipotent Being’ and placed ‘in the sight of add, the spiritual beings which he permanently

--- Page 198 ---
MARTINISM: FIRST PERIOD 774
emanates. Next comes the “universal creation” — tions or emanations of the spirits of the axis can
the cosmos —, composed of the three immensities, only be temporal and momentary’.
or worlds, already mentioned: supercelestial, celes- As for the universal creation, thus enveloped by
tial, and terrestrial. The supercelestial, which abuts the vivifying central fire axis, it is composed of two
and touches the divine immensity, although it is immensities or worlds: celestial and terrestrial. The
“limited” whereas the latter is infinite, is neverthe- celestial — symbolized by Mount Sinai - is in turn
less ‘the semblance of it’: ‘the same faculties of spir- susceptible to two divisions, into which the “seven
itual power are found in both immensities’. Four heavens” are distributed: one ternary, and the other
circles are also found therein, just as in the divine septenary. The ternary division is composed of: 1)
immensity. At the top: 1) that of the superior the “rational circle” which is ‘adherent to the
denary spirits (in fact, as we have seen, ‘major spir- super-celestial’ via the central fire axis, under the
its... clothed with a denary power’); its center 1s sign of Saturn; 2) the “visual circle”, under the sign
‘the type and figure of the Divinity whence all ema- of the Sun; 3) the “sensible circle”, under the con-
nation and all creation proceeds’. On either side joined signs of Mercury, Mars, Jupiter, Venus, and
are: 2) the circle of superior septenary spirits, the Moon. The septenary division, which is super-
guardians of the divine Law; and 3) the circle of imposed on the preceding one, is the ‘seven plane-
inferior ternary spirits, guardians of the divine spir- tary circles which contain the seven principal
itual Precept. Lastly and lowest: 4) the circle of agents of universal nature’, which ‘operate for the
minor quaternary spirits, where Man was in the conservation and the sustenance of this universe’.
first place emancipated ‘in the sight of God’ and These latter are also charged with supressing the
where he will finally be reintegrated when his rec- ‘evil spiritual beings’, imprisoned in the material
onciliation is perfect. Then come the two worlds or universe (as explained above), who ‘combat the
immensities that compose the universal creation in faculties of good influential actions which the good
the strict sense, which will be discussed below. This planetary spirits are charged to spread around the
creation is material and temporal, that is, consti- whole world’. Tossed from one to the other, the
tuted of matter and subject to time, matter and time minor-man has to choose. One can see here how
having begun simultaneously after the first prevar- the principles of traditional > astrology are incor-
ication, that of the perverse spirits. porated in an active angelology, which one might
The universal creation is circumscribed by a mys- call an “angelomachy” — a battle of good and evil
terious reality called ‘the central fire axis’, which is angels -, itself ordered in the eschatological per-
‘simultaneously the envelope, the support, and the spective of a sacred History.
center of creation’. It is ‘the principle of material Finally, just as the four supercelestial circles
life’: it animates and vivifies it. We recall that mat- reflect the ordering of the divine immensity, so
ter is the result of the combination of three “spir- the four major celestial circles (those of Saturn, the
ituous essences”: ‘in the same way as the three Sun, Mercury, and Mars) reflect the same ordering.
spirituous essences are the principle of all corpori- The three other circles, those of Jupiter, Venus, and
sation, likewise the central fire axis is that of all the Moon, or rather the spirits attached to them,
animation’ (Amadou). It is the principle of individ- serve to “substantiate” the ‘general terrestrial
uation and life in all created bodies: ‘without [it] no body’, also called ‘general creation’. From the
being can have life and movement’. The reason is latter ‘emanate all the nutriments needed to sub-
that it is ‘the organ of the inferior spirits who stantiate the particular’, or ‘particular creation’,
inhabit it and who operate in it on the principle of namely ‘all the inhabitants of the celestial and ter-
apparent corporeal matter’. These inferior spirits restrial bodies’. Both the general and the particular
(see above) are the ternary spirits, emancipated for creation are “triangular” or “ternary” in constitu-
this purpose, who provide for every corporeal tion (see above). It is the same for the “body of mat-
being a ‘vehicle of central fire’ (this notion has its ter” of present-day man, which is far different from
counterpart in the theme of the “temple”: ‘all is his primitive “body of glory”.
temple’, writes Martines). Thus ‘no body can exist Nonetheless — and this is fundamental — Mar-
without having within itself a vehicle of the central tines tells us insistently ‘not to consider these three
fire, on which the inhabitants of this axis operate, circles [sensible, visual, and rational] only materi-
as having proceeded from themselves’. It is clearly ally’. For in reality, the ascent represented by their
specified that these vehicles ‘are by no means spiri- traversal symbolizes the successive stages of recon-
tual beings. They are beings of passive life, destined ciliation of minor-men, at the end of which the
simply for the preservation of forms. The produc- latter will be reintegrated in the quaternary

--- Page 199 ---
775 MARTINISM: FIRST PERIOD
supercelestial circle which is waiting for them to was, as we know, a failure, because the foundation
repossess it: ‘it is in this holy place that Adam’s was so different from the appearances.
minor spiritual posterity is to be reintegrated’. The Martines expounded the final goal of the Order
“great matter” is in fact the ‘Reintegration of thus, replying in 1769 to Willermoz’s questionings:
beings in their primitive properties, virtues, and ‘The Order contains a true science, it is founded on
divine spiritual powers’ — to quote the title of the truth pure and simple, it is impossible for sophistry
Traité. This reintegration requires the disintegra- to reign or for charlatanry to preside there. On the
tion of man’s body of matter, which is his prison, so contrary, error lasts but a moment, it flees and truth
as to allow his original body of glory to reappear in remains’. And further on: ‘I swear to you that you
all its splendor. This great matter, which is that of will not have to ask me much more to be convinced
‘the mercy of the divine Father towards his crea- that the Order contains for the minor of this lowly
ture’, is the universal reconciliation. It is realized world things that are most necessary and essential
progressively, each time a little more completely, at for his advantage; so the Order seeks the man of
each stage of the sacred History already described. desire, and when he lets himself be led, he is con-
This occurs by means of the operations that the tent’ (Van Rijnberk, vol. II, 120). Earlier, in 1768,
‘universal Reconciler..., the Christ? — who Martines had declared to Willermoz: ‘I am only a
according to Martines is himself present and active feeble instrument which God wishes to use, unwor-
during this whole History under the guise of thy as I am, to recall men, my fellows, to their first
“types” — ‘had to perform among men for the man- masonic state, which spiritually means man or
ifestation of the divine glory, for the salvation of soul, so as to make them see truly that they are
men, and for the molestation of demons. These really man-God, being created in the image and
three operations are: first, that which was done semblance of this all-powerful Being’ (ibid. II 89).
for the reconciliation of Adam; the second, for the This was far from the ‘amiable sociability’ enjoyed
reconciliation of the human race, in the year of by many of the masonic lodges of the time!
the world 4000’ — (i.e., with Noah at the time of The two terms in the title of the Order should
the Flood, according to traditional chronology); be noted. “Elu” (chosen, elect) is only superfi-
‘and the third, which shall appear at the end of cially reminiscent of the innumerable degrees of
time and which repeats the first reconciliation of “élus” invented at the time. The term refers in fact
Adam, by reconciling his whole posterity with the to the spiritual phenomenon of “divine election”,
Creator’. through which the Eternal chooses and sets apart a
man, or a people, in view of a mission which He
te Wee Uae assigns to it. This choice is sovereign, gratuitous,
This doctrine, which forms a whole and includes and often incomprehensible to men, but God
everything from God down to man and the mate- is not accountable to anyone. Just as in sacred
rial universe, does not exist primarily for theory, History there is a “chosen people”, so there is a
but is meant to be put into practice. For every long line of chosen ones: Noah, Abraham, Isaac,
minor-man, it is a question of entering into posses- Jacob, > Moses, the prophets (including Elijah and
sion of all the arguments of the case in order to John the Baptist), right up to the apostle Paul. It is
effect this reconciliation and reintegration, first for easy to see why they all figure in the ceremonies of
his own sake but also for the sake of universal cre- the Order. Martines in fact claimed for the latter an
ation. This reintegration, as the etymology shows, origin as ancient as the universe, thus far older than
will be the return to the original integrity, the pri- masonry: ‘Remember, Lord, this Society that Thou
mal unity. This is the goal that Martines set for his hast formed and possessed from the beginning’,
Order, first called “Ordre des Elus Coéns de says a ritual invocation. The other essential term is
Josué”, then “Ordre des Chevaliers Macons Elus “coén”, which means “priest”. But a priest of what
Coéns de |’Univers”. It appeared to be a masonic religion? Certainly the word is Hebrew, but a Coén
and chivalric Order, but this was merely for practi- is not a Cohen, the Coéns are not Cohanim, the
cal purposes, so as to offer to seekers unsatisfied by priests of the Mosaic religion formerly celebrated
other Systems a real spiritual goal, capable of in the Temple of Jerusalem, and which disappeared
obtaining (as Willermoz wrote when this goal was at the same time as the Temple, to be replaced by
revealed to him) ‘that inner peace of the soul, the the ceremonies of the synagogues. If one believes
most precious possession of humanity, relatively to the Gospel — and the Coéns did so - this disappear-
his being and his principle’. However, the attempt ance was final. The cult celebrated by the Elus
to implant the Order in the field of French masonry Coéns is quite different. It is the ‘primitive cult

--- Page 200 ---
MARTINISM: FIRST PERIOD 776
confided by the Eternal to Adam and perpetuated placed under the active and efficacious patronage
by the minor elect until our day in the Ordre des of one of these Chosen Ones of the Eternal: Adam,
Coéns, which is identified with the Ordre des Elus Abraham, Moses, Zorababel, Jesus Christ. This
de |’Eternel [Order of the Elect of the Eternal] or to Chosen One, with whom the Elu Coén is con-
the High and Holy Order of which Jean-Baptiste joined, will henceforth cooperate “sympatheti-
Willermoz speaks in the Instructions which have cally” with him in the ceremonial operations, as
nothing secret but their name’ (Laurent Morlet). As long as the latter fulfill the exacting conditions that
is taught in the 99th Legon de Lyon: “The true cer- are required; but this cooperation will always take
emonial cult was taught to Adam after his fall by place through the mediation or intercession of the
the reconciling Angel; it was piously performed by spirits — angels — who are the vehicles of the divine
his son Abel in his presence, re-established by influxes or energies.
Enoch who taught new disciples, then forgotten by This is the source of the “passes”, so famous
the whole earth and restored by Noah and his chil- but so often misunderstood. These “luminous
dren; again renovated by Moses, David, Solomon, glyphs”, said to appear during the ritual, were by
and Zorobabel, and brought to final perfection by no means the object of the Coéns’ ceremonies, con-
Christ in the midst of his twelve Apostles at the trarily to what has often been thought. The aim of
Last Supper’. As one can see, Solomon and Zorob- these ceremonies is to pierce through the phenom-
abel, figures well known to masons, are here enal plane to reach and transform the being of man,
inserted from a radically different perspective. so as to set in motion his reconciliation, and at the
In truth, ‘the Order is sacerdotal’ (Amadou). Its same time that of the universe. In this perspective,
raison d’étre is to perform this cult which was origi- the “passes” are believed to be the sensible marks
nally entrusted to man, and which has not been of the divine favor, confirming that the procedure is
taken from him; it is just that its procedures, espe- true, that “the man of desire” is desiring aright.
cially the ceremonial ones, have changed. This cult is Thus they are not phenomena that one can produce
“quatriple” or quadruple, consisting of: 1) sanc- at will or on demand. They are favors given by
tification, corresponding to the divine Thought or to grace, as Martines reminded Willermoz in the let-
the Father; 2) reconciliation, corresponding to the ter cited above, from 1768: “Do not be impatient,
divine Will or to the Word; 3) purification, corre- bide your time. This sort of thing is not at the
sponding to the divine Action or to the Holy Spirit; disposal of man alone, but rather at that of the
4) expiation, corresponding to the divine Operation Most High and Omnipotent Eternal’ (Van Rijn-
or to Man. However, ‘Man in his first state only had berk, op. cit. 89).
to perform a cult of sanctification and praise. He was The active and beneficent divine reality which
the agent through which the spirits whom he was thus epiphanizes itself was mysteriously known by
supposed to retrieve’ — the perverse, prevaricating Martines, and after him by his disciples, as La
spirits — ‘were to perform the three others. Having Chose (the Thing). What is the Thing? Much has
fallen, he had to perform them for himself’. been written about it, and much erroneously.
Since the Order was sacerdotal, the receptions According to Amadou, ‘the Thing is not the person
into the various degrees are not “initiations”, like of Jesus Christ . . ., the Thing is not Jesus Christ, it
those found in the masonic systems, but rather is the presence of Jesus Christ, as the Shekinah was
“ordinations”. As Serge Caillet explains it, each of the presence of God in the Holy of Holies’. What
these ordinations impresses on him who receives it has scarcely been noticed, as pointed out by Lau-
‘a spiritual seal, the characteristic mark of divine rent Morlet, is that the Hebrew word for “thing” is
election, which makes the Coén a priest of this orig- DaBaR, which primarily signifies “word”, second-
inal cult’. And it is the spirits who confer on the arily “thing”, and thirdly “cause”. It appears from
recipient the reality of his ordination, each accord- this that the Thing is nothing less than the Creator
ing to its class: denary, octonary, or septenary, cor- Word, that Word which the Coéns’ Instructions
responding (cf. above) to the Father, the Son, and also qualified as Mediator: in short, Christ Jesus. It
the Holy Spirit. Through them, the Coén is con- was certainly not for nothing that the Order was
joined, or one might say put in communion, with originally calied the Ordre des Elus Coéns de Josué,
the Chosen One of the Eternal, whether patriarch for in Hebrew Joshua and Jesus are the same name.
or prophet, who presides over the class into which Thus the Coén is ‘a partisan of the true Wisdom’,
he is admitted. It is from this Chosen One ‘that he as Martines proclaims, asserting unequivocally
receives the name, the spiritual influx, the seal of that this same Wisdom has ‘dictated . . . the knowl-
his own election’ (L. Morlet). Each of the elections edge [that he] professes’. This Wisdom, which
successively received within the Order is in fact Saint-Martin would celebrate without any diver-

--- Page 201 ---
WHE MARTINISM: FIRST PERIOD
gence from his master’s thought under its tradi- the Coén, in his accomplished state which is that of
tional name of Sophia, thus presides over the Order Réau-Croix, fully capable of working for the uni-
and all its works. That is why these are, as has versal reconciliation.
been said, theosophy, anthroposophy, cosmo-
sophy, chronosophy, and sophianic liturgy. More- 3 THE Lbrewcy
over, in the Christian tradition to which Martines’ The destinies of the Ordre des Elus Coéns, appar-
disciples belonged who gathered on the occasion of ently fairly unfruitful, are described elsewhere [>
the Lecons de Lyon, Wisdom typifies the Creator Pasqually; Elus Coéns]. The Order contained
Word. few members, and suffered a kind of official
The “passes” have another purpose: they are ostracism. Nonetheless, it continued to arouse
signals, even signatures, of the spirits who “acti- curiosity, as on the occasion of the Convent des
vate” in cooperation with the celebrant. The latter Philaléthes (1785 and 1787). Also significant is the
is provided with a collection of 2400 diagrams and interest, lasting if sporadic, on the part of Bacon de
as many names of angels (in Hebrew) — brought to la Chevalerie, a highly placed Mason in the Grand
light by Robert Amadou and published by him Orient de France, whom Martines had named as
under the appropriate title of Angéliques - his universal Substitute. Willermoz, who by com-
diagrams permitting the identification of the angels mon consent was the real preserver of the Order,
who are at work. In short, the Coén ceremonial was assailed by indiscreet requests which he could
is a liturgy that is truly co-celebrated by angels not always reject.
and men. Willermoz in fact managed to preserve for a time
This liturgy should in no way be identified or the legacy of the master to whom he remained
even compared with a liturgy of the ecclesiastical faithful until his death. He preserved it in a way
type. What is believed to be operative in it is the that the latter would surely have disapproved of.
primitive cosmic priesthood with which Adam, the Convinced that this System, which was more
first Man, was endowed. The Coén is devoted to crypto-masonic than masonic, was doomed as
the “primitive cult” aiming at the reconciliation of such, he concealed it within the hybrid System,
man and of the creation — of man with God, man both masonic and chivalric, that he himself
with the creation, and the creation with God. And invented, namely the Régime Ecossais Rectifié. We
in order to do this, the Réau-Croix, identified both must make clear that the Ordre des Elus Coéns
with the first, fallen Adam, and with Christ, the de |’Univers is not part of the Régime Ecossais
new Adam, universal Redeemer and Repairer, reca- Rectifié; but it is nevertheless at the heart of the lat-
pitulates in and through himself the stage of fall ter, and even is its “heart” (Amadou). The Régime
and “privation”. The Coén cult thus does not rival teaches the same doctrine, the same “science of
that of the Church, does not substitute for it or sur- man”, but without practicing any liturgical cere-
pass it: it presupposes it and harmonizes with it. mony, and does not even speak of it except in
This is the reason why Martines obliged the Coéns covert terms to the Grands Profés (the highest
to practice the ceremonies and receive the sacra- degree of the R.E.R.). “The Régime Ecossais
ments of the Church. Rectifié lives only by the doctrine of reintegration
Moreover, just as the Church’s priests, beside the and for reintegration, like the Ordre des Elus
ceremonies of their cult, must also devote them- Coéns. Between the two of them, the modus
selves to personal prayer, both spontaneous and operandi differs’ (Amadou). In the Régime, only
regulated, that is, in rhythm dictated by rule (the Masons and Knights appear. If there are Coéns
offices of the monastic or canonical Hours, reading present, it is not in that capacity, but incognito,
the Breviary and the Holy Scriptures), likewise This creation of Willermoz was of capital impor-
these priests of a particular kind who are the Coéns tance for Martinesism. It was in the bosom of the
are obliged every six hours to say prayers modeled Régime Ecossais Rectifié that its survival was
(with adaptations) on those same offices, not to assured, at least in its doctrinal form, after the dis-
mention various other offices to be celebrated fol- integration of the Ordre Coén. All the “instruc-
lowing the calendar (days of the week, phases of tions” officially dispensed, from that of Apprentice
the moon, seasons . . .). In addition, they must fol- up to Grand Profés, taught Martines’ doctrine step
low rules of diet (fasting) and practice a real moral by step, in an increasingly overt fashion. Willermoz
and mental ascesis. In sum, the Coén is a priest and declared it explicitly in a letter of 1812: “The initi-
the Coén rule of life is an ascesis. And the Coén ation of the Grands Profés instructs the tested
doctrine, which can truly be called a theosophy and mason, the man of desire, about the origin and for-
an anthroposophy, is ordered to this end: to make mation of the physical universe, its destination and

--- Page 202 ---
MARTINISM: FIRST PERIOD 778
the occasional cause of its creation at a certain the Universe, 1782), which are quasi-official expo-
moment and at no other; the emanation and eman- sitions of the doctrine. Even afterwards, this con-
cipation of man in a glorious form, and his sublime tinued to inspire all his works right up to his death:
destination at the center of created things; his pre- L’Homme de désir (The Man of Desire, 1790),
varication, his fall, the benefit and absolute neces- Ecce Homo (Behold the Man, 1792), Le Nouvel
sity of the Incarnation of the Word itself for the Homme (The New Man, 1792), and Le Ministere
Redemption, etc.’ de ’Homme-Esprit (The Ministry of the Spirit-
Even so, the most outstanding disciples of Mar- Man, 1802). His thought is fundamentally the
tines, namely ~ Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin and reflection of Martines’: a faithful reflection,
Jean-Jacques Du Roy d’Hauterive, who organized although enriched by his own personality as well as
the Lecons de Lyon with Willermoz himself from by a theosophy in which the role of theurgy is much
1774 to 1776, did not hold to his System for very reduced, even absent, or else totally interiorized
long. Hauterive withdrew to his little Coén group and spiritualized. Without a doubt, his literary
in Toulouse, and “de-masonized” the ceremonies work has been an efficient vehicle for the diffusion
to simplify them and reduce them to the purest spir- of the doctrine. It is principally thanks to Saint-
itual > alchemy. Saint-Martin, for his part, chose a Martin’s interpretations that Martinesian concepts
purely internal path, known since Papus under the found a ready response among the French Roman-
odd name of the “cardiac way”, otherwise the tic writers: Chateaubriand (on whom, however,
“way of the heart”, where prayer takes precedence they made little impression), much more >
over all ceremonial forms as a method of spiritual Ballanche, and equally Balzac (who “married”
realization. Already while he was with Martines, Saint-Martin to ~ Swedenborg), Lamennais,
Saint-Martin had a certain suspicion of the rituals, Sainte-Beuve, Hugo, and > Nerval; and also in
hence his well-known question: ‘Master, does it German writers: > Schelling, Zacharias Werner,
really take all these forms to pray to the good and the Schlegel brother. On the sidelines we might
God?’ The reply is less well known, and gives food also list Sébastien Mercier, author in the Tableaux
for thought: ‘One should be content with what one de Paris (Pictures of Paris, 1783) of the first report
has’. Later, in Ecce Homo, Saint-Martin would on the “Martinists”; also Madame de Staél
severely denounce the ‘outer manifestations or with her De I’Allemagne (On Germany, 1813);
movements’, declaring: “The works that result and lastly, though more subservient to literary fash-
from them are, so to speak, the shadows of works, ion, > Cazotte, Charles Nodier, George Sand, and
works of the surface, and consequently not Alexandre Dumas. > Joseph de Maistre occupies a
sufficiently enlivening to link with the plan of God’s place to himself: for all that he was a Roman
great work, which is to recall us to our inner center Catholic and a papist, he presented in his Soirées
where God is to be found, instead of dividing our- de Saint-Pétersbourg (Saint Petersburg Evenings,
selves into centers that are external, fragile, 1821), under the guise of a controversy for and
obscure, or corrupt, where God is not to be found’. against > “illuminism”, an excellent defence and
For all that, Saint-Martin remained convinced all illustration of Martinist ideas. He never abjured
his life, if not of the utility of Martines’ practices them, to the point (as Jean-Marc Vivenza has
then at least of the truth of his doctrine, which he recently shown, op. cit., 64-67) of regularly per-
continued to deepen even after his discovery from forming the “operations” of the Order at the pro-
1788 onwards of Jacob Boehme, who opened pitious calendrical moments, even in the heat of the
new horizons to him. He then set himself to Revolution. So it was through Willermoz and
“marry” his two masters, as he put it. He made Saint-Martin, or their joint influence, that the doc-
himself the efficient and constant propagator of this trine of reintegration and all that goes with it has
doctrine, performing this task as co-author, in the been perpetuated up to the present day. Thus, for
function of secretary, of the Traité sur la Réintégra- example, in Russia at the end of the 18th and begin-
tion, as well as in the many documents, rituals, and ning of the r9th century the noun “Martinism” and
instructions needed for the life of the Order; also the adjective “Martinist” carried several meanings,
by putting out many of the Legons de Lyon; by serving to designate: 1) the Régime Ecossais Rectifié,
publishing (under the pseudonym of Philosophe introduced into that country after the Convent of
Inconnu [Unknown Philosopher]) the books Des Wilhelmsbad (1782); 2) the theosophy of Martines;
erreurs et de la vérité (On Errors and Truth, 1775) 3) the theosophy of Saint-Martin (some of his works
and Tableau naturel des rapports qui existent entre having been published in Russian thanks to >
Dieu, homme et Vunivers (Natural Table of the Novikov and > Lopukhin); 4) in a vague but current
Relationships that Exist between God, Man, and manner, all these three senses at once.

--- Page 203 ---
VES} MARTINISM: FIRST PERIOD
It should be added that all forms of Martinism 1782; reprint in (Euvres majeures, vol. 2 (R. Amadou,
then suffered a long eclipse. The works of Saint- ed.), Hildesheim/New York: Georg Olms, 1980.
Martin lacked a readership until they were brought
Lit.: “Notice historique sur le martinésisme et le martin-
back to light at the end of the roth century by >
isme”, in: Martines de Pasqually, Traité de la Réintégra-
Papus; the Traité de la réintégration (Treatise on
tion des Etres, Paris: Chacornac, 1899, 1-9 ¢ “Nouvelle
Reintegration), which up to then had only circu- Notice historique sur le martinésisme et le martinisme”,
lated in manuscript form, was first published only in: Franz von Baader, Les Enseignements secrets de Mar-
in 1899; it was not until 1926 that the Instructions tines de Pasqually, Paris: Chacornac, 1900, 1-192; repr.
secretes aux Profés (Secret Instructions for the Paris: Télétes, 1989 (first German ed. of Baader’s text in
Profés) were rediscovered and published by Paul Friedrich Schlegel’s Concordia, Vienna, 1823) ¢ Robert
Amadou, Martinisme (Documents martinistes 2) 2nd
Vuillaud; and in 1970, the Instructions secrétes aux
ed. Les Auberts: Institut Eléazar, 1993, 3-28 @ idem,
Grands Profés (Secret Instructions for the Grands Introduction a Martines de Pasqually, Les Auberts: Insti-
Profés) by Antoine Faivre. But since then, the four tut Eléazar, n.p., n.d. (a series of articles published in
components of Papus’s title cited at the beginning, L’Initiation in 1969) ¢ Robert Ambelain, Le Martin-
“Martinesism, Willermozism, Martinism, and isme: Histoire et doctrine, Paris: Niclaus, 1946 # Serge
Freemasonry”, have met with increasing success, Caillet, Cours de Martinisme, introduction au Martiné-
which goes to show that to study this question does sisme, Institut Eléazar, private ed., n.p., n.d. (still in the
process ofpublication: 13 vols. published through 2003)
not imply a merely antiquarian and documentary
¢ idem, “Les sept sceaux des Elus Coéns”, Renaissance
interest, and that the doctrine of reintegration Traditionnelle 122 (2000), 100-113; 125 (200T), 41-63;
offers to a number of men of our time a “spiritual 126 (2001), 74-88; 127-128 (2001), 193-209 ¢ Adolphe
goal” as much appreciated by them as it was by Franck, La Philosophie mystique en France a la fin du
Willermoz. XVIIF° siécle: Saint-Martin et son maitre Martinez
Pasquallis, Paris/London/New York: Germer Bailliére,
Traité de la réintégration des étres créés dans leurs 1866, 1-25, 135-226 René Le Forestier, La Franc-
primitives propriétés, vertus et puissances spirituelles Maconnerie occultiste au XVIII° siecle et Ordre des
divines (Robert Amadou, ed.), Paris: Robert Dumas, Elus Coéns, Paris: Dorbon, 1928 # Joseph de Maistre,
1974 (including the text of the first edition, Paris: Cha- Les Soirées de Saint-Pétersbourg, Paris & Lyon: Rusand,
cornac, 1899) ¢ Traité sur la réintégration des étres 1821, Paris: reprint Guy Trédaniel, 1980, 225-255 ¢
dans leur premiére propriété, vertu et puissance spir- Nicole Jacques-Lefévre, Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin
ituelle divine (Robert Amadou, ed.), Le Tremblay: Dif- (1743-1803), le philosophe inconnu (Bibliothéque de
fusion rosicrucienne, 1993 & 1995 ¢ Martines de !Hermétisme), Paris: Albin Michel/Dervy, 2003 ¢
Pasqually, La Magie des Elus Coéns, Franc-Macgon- Jacques Matter, Saint-Martin, le Philosophe Inconnu: Sa
nerie: Explication Secréte du Catéchisme d’Apprenti, vie, ses écrits, son maitre Martinez et leurs groupes, 2nd
Compagnon et Maitre Coéns, Institut Eléazar, n.d. « ed., Paris: Didier, 1862, reprint Editions d’Aujourd’hui:
Martines de Pasqually, La Magie des Elus Coéns, Plan de la Tour, 1979, 8-77 ¢ Papus, Martines de
Théurgie: Instruction secrete, Paris: Cariscript, 1988 Pasqually: Sa vie, ses pratiques magiques, son ceuvre, ses
Pierre Fournié, Ce que nous avons été, ce que nous disciples, suivis des catéchismes des Elus Coens, Paris:
sommes et ce que nous deviendrons, London: A. Dulau Chamuel, 1895; Paris: reprint Demeter, 1986 @ idem,
& Co., 1801; Paris: Gutenberg Reprint, 1983 ¢ Pierre Martinésisme, Willermozisme, Martinisme et Franc-
Fournié(?), Nouvelle Instruction Coén (R. Amadou, Maconnerie, Paris: Chamuel, 1899; Paris: reprint Deme-
ed.), Institut Eléazar n.d. ¢ Les Legons de Lyon aux ter, 1986 ¢ Gérard van Rijnberk, Un thaumaturge au
Elus Coéns, un cours dilluminisme au XVIII° siécle XVIII? siécle: Martines de Pasqually, sa vie, son ceuvre,
par Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin, Jean-Jacques Du son Ordre, 1780-1824, vol. I, Paris: Alcan, 193 5, vol. II,
Roy d’Hauterive, Jean-Baptiste Willermoz (Robert Lyon: Derain-Raclet, 1938 (several new eds.) # Jean-
Amadou, ed.), Paris: Dervy, 1999 ¢# Willermoz, Francois Var, “L’Esotérisme chrétien et le Régime Ecos-
“Instruction secréte pour la réception des Profés” in: sais Rectifié”, Travaux de la Loge nationale de
Paul Vulliaud, Joseph de Maistre franc-macon, Paris: recherches Villard de Honnecourt (Grande Loge
Nourry, 1926, 231-247 # Willermoz, “Dialogue aprés Nationale Frangaise, Neuilly-sur-Seine) 31, 2nd series
la réception d’un Frére Grand Profés”, idem, 248-251 (1995), 185-228 # Auguste Viatte, Les Sources occultes
¢ Willermoz, “Instruction secréte de Grand Profés” in: du Romantisme: Illuminisme, Théosophie (1770-1820),
René Le Forestier, La Franc-Maconnerie occultiste et vol. 1 Le Préromantisme, Paris: Champion, 1927, 45-
templiére aux XVIII* et XIX° siécles (Antoine Faivre, 71, 139-152 (etc.); Paris: reprint Champion, 1979 ¢
ed.), Paris: Aubier-Montaigne, 1970, 1021-1049 ¢ Jean-Marc Vivenza, Maistre, Puiseaux: Pardés, 2003
Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin, Des Erreurs et de la Arthur Edward Waite, The Unknown Philosopher: The
Vérité, ou les Hommes rappelés au Principe universel Life of Louis Claude de Saint-Martin and the Substance
de la Science, Edinburgh, Paris, 1775; reprint in of his Transcendental Doctrine, London: Philip Wellby,
(Euvres majeures, vol. 1 (Robert Amadou, ed.), 1901; New York: reprint Rudolf Steiner Publications,
Hildesheim/New York: Georg Olms, 1975 ¢ idem, 1970, 77-326.
Tableau Naturel des Rapports qui existent entre
Dieu, l’Homme et [lUnivers, Edinburgh, Paris, JEAN-FRANCOIS VAR

--- Page 204 ---
MARTINISM: SECOND PERIOD 780
Martinism: second period States the Martinist Order split in 1902 after a
bitter debate on whether or not non-Freemasons
> Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin created neither (and women) could receive the Martinist initiation.
an Order nor a society. Whether or not an “apos- Whilst Papus’ answer was in the affirmative, some
tolic succession”, originating from him, reached American Martinists preferred to grant solely to
into the late 19th century, remains a matter of some Freemasons membership into the Order, and it
debate. In the 1880s, two well-known figures in was the latter who later established a separate
the Paris esoteric milieu, namely magnetist Henri “Rectified American Martinist Order”.
Delaage (1825-1882) and librarian Augustin Cha- Whether non-Freemasons and women should
boseau (1868-1946), claimed independently to be initiated is just one of the questions plaguing
have received such a succession, through an unbro- modern Martinism, as well as being the cause of
ken lineage of “Unknown Superiors” (Supérieurs several schisms throughout its history. Another
Inconnus) dating back to Saint-Martin himself. No contentious question is: in the event of an obvious
evidence confirming (or definitely disproving) their contrast emerging between the respective teachings
claims has ever surfaced. of + Martinez de Pasqually and Saint-Martin,
Both Delaage and Chaboseau were friends of > should the former or the latter prevail? The “Saint-
Papus (Gérard Encausse, 1865-1916), a key char- Martinist” wing would often regard the acknow!l-
acter in the development of contemporary Mar- edgement of Jesus Christ’s divinity as a central
tinism. Papus claimed to have been initiated by Martinist tenet (a stand not regarded as incom-
Delaage in 1882, and exchanged initiations with patible with a certain anticlericalism), whilst the
Chaboseau in 1888. That same year, Papus created “Martinezist” faction would, in certain cases, also
his journal, L’[nitiation, which was published until initiate non-Christians. “Saint-Martinism” is more
1914. In 1891, Papus and Chaboseau founded a concerned with Saint-Martin’s “way of the heart”,
Martinist Order, which included some of the most whilst Martinezism focuses on occult techniques.
well-known figures of the Paris esoteric under- A third source of conflict concerns the rela-
ground, such as > Stanislas de Guaita (1861-1897) tionship between Martinism and the Gnostic
and — Joséphin Péladan (1858-1918). The Order Churches. In r911, Papus signed a “Treaty” with
was probably the most successful among the many Jean Bricaud (1882-1934), thereby making the
founded or led by Papus. It became a matter of latter’s + Gnostic Church the “official church” of
course for everybody interested in esotericism to Martinism. Not everybody agreed, however, and
become initiated into the Martinist Order; even the seed of further schism was sown. Papus thought
+ René Guénon (1886-1951) was one of them, it was entirely possible for the same Order to
before breaking with Papus and leaving the Order include both a Saint-Martinist and a Martinezist
in 1909. As was usual then, most Martinists were, wing. During the last years of his life, Papus even
at the same time, members of one or other Rosi- considered the possibility of incorporating a
crucian, neo-Templar, or neo-Gnostic body. Most, third wing into the Order, which he called “Willer-
but by no means all, were Freemasons [-* Freema- mozist” (after the name of > Jean-Baptiste Willer-
sonry], and members of the “Egyptian” Rites of moz), and which took the shape of a “Martinist
Memphis and Misraim in particular. Grand Chapter” open only to Freemasons.
The success of Papus’ Martinism was also note- It was Papus’ own charismatic personality, how-
worthy for its international character. In 1891, a ever, that kept the different wings together, and
branch was created in the United States, and by when he died in 1916, mid-way through World
1900 the Order had been implanted in most Latin War I, schism immediately followed. Most Martin-
American countries, thanks, among others, to ists recognized Charles Détré (“Téder”, 1850-
Viscount Albert-Raymond Costet de Mascheville 1918) as Papus’ successor, but he died only two
(1872-1943), a French pupil of Papus who emi- years after Papus. Notwithstanding the opposition
grated firstly to Argentina and later to Brazil. In of Téder’s widow, a majority of French Martinists,
1949 his son, Viscount Léo Costet de Masche- in their turn, acknowledged Jean Bricaud as his
ville (1901-1970), founded under the name Sri successor. Bricaud was at the same time the patri-
Sevananda an independent “Mystical Associa- arch of the > Gnostic Church allied with Martin-
tion of the West” (Association Mystique de l’Occi- ism under the 1911 “Treaty”. Both Téder and
dent: AMO), devoted to a “mystical Martinism” Bricaud tended to neglect the Saint-Martinist wing
and to the ideas of the Lyon healer > Anthelme in favour of the other two, Martinezist and Willer-
Nizier Philippe, “Maitre Philippe” (1849-1905), mozist. Bricaud claimed a (fairly doubtful) apos-
one of Papus’s closest associates. In the United tolic succession from Martinez de Pasqually

--- Page 205 ---
781 MARTINISM: SECOND PERIOD
himself, and also tried to exclude non-Freemasons Martinist Order (O.M.T.) is expected to be an
and women from Martinist initiation. AMORC member in good standing and with at
The Saint-Martinist reaction was led by Victor least a First Temple Degree initiation. The O.M.T.
Blanchard (1878-1953) who, on January 3, 1921, has three degrees, in fact, and its curriculum
founded the independent Martinist and Synarchist includes seventy-two monographs to be studied
Order. The term “Synarchist” was a reference over a period of six years. Initiations are conferred
to the Marquis ~ Joseph-Alexandre Saint-Yves inan O.M.T. temple, normally located at the prem-
d’Alveydre (1842-1910), recognized by Papus as ises of an AMORC facility. After the first six years,
his “intellectual master” (his “mystical master” the initiate may join the Circle of Unknown Supe-
being Maitre Philippe). Blanchard was a member riors (the higher echelon of the Order). The hierar-
of several esoteric orders and brotherhoods, and chy of the Traditional Martinist Order largely
was also a Gnostic bishop, having been con- coincides with AMORC’s.
secrated by Bricaud in 1920. Shortly after this Blanchard and the AMORC notwithstanding, it
consecration, however, Bricaud and Blanchard was the Lyon branch of Bricaud which attracted
quarrelled, and the latter went on to promote, in the largest number of French Martinists in the
addition to his Martinist and Synarchist Order, 1930s and 1940s. Bricaud died in 1934; his succes-
both Rosicrucian and Gnostic organizations to sor, Constant Chevillon (1880-1944), renamed the
rival those led by Bricaud. organization “Martinist Martinezist Order” in
There was some degree of interaction between > order to emphasize the Martinez connection (as
Rosicrucianism and Martinism during the 1920s distinct from the more purely Saint-Martinist
and 1930s, however. In fact, Martinist divisions group led by Blanchard). Chevillon was assassi-
also reflected different attitudes towards the Rosi- nated in 1944 by French Nazi collaborators, and
crucian order AMORC, and the activities of its was succeeded by Henri-Charles Dupont (1877-
leader > Harvey Spencer Lewis (1883-1939). In 1960), who in turn emphasized the Masonic
1934, Lewis promoted the creation of the FUDOSI connection, in line with the Willermoz tradition. A
(Universal Federation of Orders and Societies of more Martinezist group, less interested in Willer-
Initiation), which was regarded by his critics as an moz and more interested in theurgical “opera-
attempt to impose AMORC hegemony in Europe. tions”, had in the meantime been established in
Blanchard was one of the founding members of the Paris, in 1942, by Robert Ambelain (1907-1997),
FUDOSI, although he was later expelled from it (in under the name of “Martinist Order of the Elus
1939) following Rosicrucian quarrels with Lewis Cohens”. In 1952, the Saint-Martinist wing gener-
(but was readmitted in 1946, shortly before the ated, in turn, a new organization when Papus’ son,
FUDOSI ceased to exist in 1951). While Papus’ old Philippe Encausse (1906-1984), revived a “Mar-
companion, Chaboseau, sided with Blanchard (and tinist Order” in 1952, keeping as loyal as possible
would later replace him as a FUDOSI member), the to his father’s style, emphasizing Saint-Martin’s
“Lyon group” (so named after it moved the Mar- mysticism and open to both non-Freemasons and
tinist Order headquarters to Lyon), led by Bricaud, women. On the other hand, he invited Ambelain
did not support Lewis and eventually joined the to contribute to his journal L’Initiation (published
rival international FUDOFSI federation, a creation from 1953 until the present time, a revival of
of Lewis’ American arch-rival Reuben Swinburne Papus’ journal, now edited by Yves-Fred Boisset
Clymer (1878-1966). and Michel Léger), and thus proving that co-oper-
In 1937, Blanchard granted Lewis “full author- ative efforts between the different wings were not
ity” to confer Martinist initiations in the United impossible.
States. After he broke with FUDOSI, Blanchard Ostensibly, in the first decades after World War
also granted some sort of Martinist succession II, the three wings were clearly separated (Mar-
to several independent Martinist organizations in tinezist under Ambelain, Saint-Martinist under
the United States, Canada, and Europe. Quarrels Encausse, Willermozist under Dupont) but, in real-
about the FUDOSI also led to a (temporary) divi- ity, things were more complicated than that.
sion between Blanchard and Chaboseau, the latter Dupont, for example, claimed to have been initi-
going on to establish yet another Martinist body, ated into the highest Martinezist degree by Che-
known as the “Traditional Martinist Order” and villon himself, and he in turn initiated Encausse
co-founded by Victor-Emile Michelet (1861-1938). shortly before his death in 1960. In 1962, En-
Notwithstanding further schisms, this Order con- causse’s and Ambelain’s orders merged into a single
tinued to operate within the AMORC. organization, which included an external circle
Today, any would-be member of the Traditional (Saint-Martinist) and an internal one (Martinezist).

--- Page 206 ---
MARTINISM: SECOND PERIOD 782
It was not easy, however, to keep within the same two key figures in the world of Italian esoteric
fold those who were interested in Martinez’ orders, namely Gastone Ventura (1906-1981) and
theurgy and those who preferred to follow Francesco Brunelli (1927-1982). These two leaders
the Christian mysticism of Maitre Philippe represent, respectively, the Saint-Martinist and the
(Encausse’s own godfather). In retrospect, a split Martinezist wing. Brunelli was also instrumental in
was inevitable, and in 1967 Ambelain’s Martinezist maintaining a relationship between Martinism and
wing went its separate way. After Philippe an Italian Gnostic Church in which he served as a
Encausse’s death in 1984, the Martinist Order con- bishop, while Ventura did his best to keep his
tinued its activities (his successor, since 1979 until branch ‘independent from any church, including
the present time, is Emilio Lorenzo), while Ambe- the Gnostic one’.
lain went on to pursue other interests and his fol- As was the case in France, the two branches
lowers split into a dozen different Martinezist made efforts to merge in 1962 and again in 1982,
groups. although the resulting united orders proved to be
It may be that the largest number of Martinists in short-lived. Not only did the Ventura (Saint-Mar-
a single country has been, and still is, concentrated tinist) and the Brunelli (Martinezist) branches go
in Italy. The concept of a “Neapolitan Martinism” their separate ways, but after the two leaders died
has been used by several historians to designate an in the early 1980s, each group was plagued by dis-
esoteric milieu in the tradition of > Raimondo putes about their succession, and eventually broke
di Sangro di San Severo (1710-1771) and > up into several different independent branches. The
Cagliostro (1743?-1795), the key figure in the late largest organizations are currently the “Martinist
19th century being Giustiniano Lebano (1832- Order” (led by Sebastiano Caracciolo) in the Ven-
1909). Since ~ Giuliano Kremmerz (pseudonym tura tradition, and the “Ancient and Traditional
used by Ciro Formisano, 1861-1930) was a pupil Martinist Order” (OMAT) in the Brunelli tradi-
of Lebano, the Kremmerz movement (including the tion, although at least half a dozen other branches
Brotherhood of Myriam and other organizations) can lay claim to a national following in present-day
has sometimes been seen as an offshoot of Martin- Italy. It is as true in Italy as it was in France, that the
ism. Interactions between the two wings are division between a Martinezist and a Saint-Martin-
frequent in Italy, and extend far beyond the small ist wing is only indicative of a general trend and
and recently established “Kremmerzian Martinist is far from clear-cut. Ventura was interested in
Order”, led by psychiatrist Mario Betti. theurgy, and several members of the Brunelli
There is, in fact, no historical evidence of a con- branch wrote about Saint-Martin.
tinuum between the presence of followers of Mar- It is true, however, that Brunelli’s interest in rit-
tinez de Pasqually in the esoteric milieu of Naples ual > magic led him to promote closer co-opera-
in the first decades of the 19th century, and of Mar- tion between his Martinist Order and several
tinists in 2oth century Italy. Papus’ Martinist Order branches of Kremmerz’ Brotherhood of Myriam.
soon expanded into Italy, and counted among its Brunelli’s association with Luigi Petriccione (1928-
initiates such well-known figures as neo-Pagan eso- 1995), who was both a Martinist and a Kremmez-
tericist > Arturo Reghini (1876-1946) as well as ian, contributed to the development, in Brunelli’s
poet laureate Gabriele d’Annunzio (1863-1938). branch, of a number of detailed, confidential books
Reghini, however, later regarded both Papus and of instructions on “internal” ~ alchemy and sexual
Saint-Martin as too Christian, and became a vocal magic, which, in turn, caused even greater divisions
critic of Martinism in general. After Papus’ death, between his form of Martinism and that of the
French schisms spread to Italy: the Martinezist more Saint-Martinist wings. Brunelli was a great
wing loyal to Bricaud and his Gnostic Church kept ritualist, quite apart from his interest in sexual
the name “Martinist Order”, while a Saint-Mar- magic; his (Martinezist) rituals for consecrating
tinist wing reorganized itself under the name water, salt, ashes and fire, for blessing ritual dresses
“Supreme Council of the Martinist Order”. and frankincense, and for evoking elementals and
The Fascist regime persecuted both groups for nature spirits, are widely used in international
their supposed connection to the then banned Ital- Martinist circles and beyond, even today.
ian Freemasonry, and it was not until 1951 that an AMORC’s Traditional Martinist Order is also
“Italian Council of the Martinist Order” (includ- quite active in Italy, with some two hundred mem-
ing both a Martinezist and a Saint-Martinist wing) bers. In addition to France and Italy, the largest
was able to reorganize itself, albeit for only three Martinist groups are found in other French-speak-
years. The real success of Martinism in Italy ing countries (Belgium and Africa), in the
came in the 1960s, however, thanks to the efforts of Caribbean region (Barbados, Bahamas), and in

--- Page 207 ---
783 MATHERS
Latin America. A Martinism independent of the producing an English edition of some parts of the
Traditional Martinist Order and AMORC has Zohar, using -» Knorr von Rosenroth’s Latin ver-
existed in the United States almost from its start, sion as his main source. This was published in 1887
although its constituency has remained quite small. as The Kabbalah Unveiled, and was to remain the
A large majority of English-speaking Martinists in most important and influential publication Math-
general are members of the Traditional Martinist ers ever produced. During this early period in
Order, a membership they regard as ancillary to London he also made the acquaintance of >
their AMORC membership. Helena Petrovna Blavatsky and > Anna Kingsford,
attending and lecturing at meetings of the » Theo-
Lit.: Robert Ambelain, Le Martinisme: Histoire et sophical Society and the Hermetic Society [-» Her-
doctrine, Paris: Niclaus, 1946 [with great caution] ¢ meticism and Hermetic Societies]. Around 1887 he
Philippe Encausse, Science occulte ou 25 années d’oc- was invited by Westcott to collaborate in the writ-
cultisme occidental: Papus, sa vie, son ceuvre, Paris:
ing of rituals and teachings for an occult Order on
OCIA, 1949 # Gastone Ventura, Tutti gli uomini del
Martinismo, Rome: Atanor, 1978 ¢ Francesco the basis of a cipher manuscript, very probably
Brunelli, I! Martinismo e l’Ordine Martinista, Perugia: composed by the occultist and polymath Kenneth
Volumnia, 1980 # Massimo Introvigne, I! cappello del R.H. Mackenzie (1833-1886), that Westcott seems
mago: I nuovi movimenti magici dallo spiritismo al to have obtained after Mackenzie’s death. This led
satanismo, Milan: SugarCo, 1990 # Marie-Sophie to the eventful foundation of the Hermetic Order
André & Christophe Beaufils, Papus — Biographie: La
of the Golden Dawn, of which Mathers was to bea
belle époque de l’occultisme, Paris: Berg International,
leader, together with Westcott and the head of the
1995.
S.R.L.A. William Robert Woodman (1828-1891).
His mottoes (i.e. initiatic aliases) in the Order were
MASSIMO INTROVIGNE
Deo Duce Comite Ferro (from Latin: “With God as
leader, and the sword as companion”), and S’Ri-
Mathers, Samuel Liddell “MacGregor”, oghail Mo Dhream (from Gaelic: “Royal is my
* 8.1.1854 Hackney (East London), tribe”). In 1890 he married the sister of the philoso-
t 20.11.1918 Paris pher Henri Bergson (1859-1941), Mina (later
Moina) Bergson (1865-1928), who also joined the
Together with > William Wynn Westcott, Order.
Mathers played a fundamental role in the history of It is evident today that it was from Westcott that
English occultism as the co-founder of the > Her- the idea of the Golden Dawn originated, and that
metic Order of the Golden Dawn and as one of the he contributed at least as much as Mathers to the
leading intellectual forces behind the development elaboration of its system of teachings. But when an
of its teachings and ritual system. Little is known Inner Order (the Ordo Rosae Rubeae et Aureae
about his early life. He probably received some Crucis) was added to the Outer one (the Golden
classical education at Bedford Grammar School, Dawn stricto sensu), it was Mathers more than
but the first definite date on record (after his date of anyone else who came to produce its rituals and the
birth) is his initiation into Craft > Freemasonry in bulk of the new teachings. As time went by the
1877. He was then living in Bournemouth with his Order met with considerable success, and Mathers
widowed mother, working as a clerk, and would felt less and less inclined to share his authority with
remain there until 1885, when he moved to Lon- Westcott. In 1892 Mathers and Moina moved to
don. Around that time he started to add the name Paris, opening there a new Temple of the Order (the
“MacGregor” (from a traditional Scottish clan) to Ahathoor Temple No. 7), and his distance from the
his own, and to use the title “Comte de Glenstrae”. headquarters in London probably made him feel
This was connected to his lifelong passion for more and more uneasy about Westcott’s role in the
Celtic lore, but it is unlikely that his claims to an Order. It seems likely that Mathers eventually came
aristocratic lineage had any concrete ground. In to see him as a potentially dangerous rival in the
1882 he joined the Societas Rosicruciana In Anglia leadership. A rather drastic solution to the problem
(S.R.I.A.), a group composed entirely of Master produced itself when Westcott’s occult activities
masons and devoted to the study of Western eso- became known to his superiors in office. He was
teric traditions. In that period Mathers made the forced to resign from the Order, leaving Mathers as
acquaintance of W.W. Westcott, also a recent mem- the only leader (Woodman having died in 1891).
ber of the S.R.I.A., who was evidently impressed by While in Paris, Mathers pursued his occult
his enthusiasm for occult matters. Westcott decided researches and especially studied manuscripts of
to help him financially while he was engaged in old magical grimoires in the main libraries of

--- Page 208 ---
MATHERS 784
the French capital, some of which he was able to these for their frauds, but they were eventually
edit and publish. One such edition, The Key of arrested. This made the name of the Order, whose
Solomon the King (1889), based on manuscripts in very existence was supposed to be handled as dis-
the British Library, had already been published in creetly as possible, appear in the yellow press in a
the early days of the Golden Dawn, while he was very bad light. Consequently, a certain number of
still in London. The publication of another impor- members felt obliged to resign.
tant text, edited from a manuscript in the Biblio- Little is known about the Mathers’ activities in
théque de |’Arsenal, took place during his time in Paris after 1900. Apart from ephemeral contribu-
Paris: The Book ofthe Secret Magic of Abra-Melin tions to some English occultist journals, such as
the Mage (1898). Another edition of a medieval Anubis (1902-1903), Mathers did not publish
magical text, The Grimoire of Armadel (1980) was much in the following years, although he continued
published only many years after his death. It must directing his branch of the Order. In 1910 he went
be noted that, if these texts never became, as such, back to London to try to prevent, by taking legal
part of the official teachings of the Golden Dawn, action, the publication of the rituals of the Order
they nevertheless served as an important source of undertaken by his former pupil and friend Aleister
inspiration, and had a wide impact on contempo- Crowley in the pages of the latter’s periodical The
rary occultism even beyond Golden Dawn circles. Equinox. The legal action and the court hearings
In Paris Mathers, who sometimes used to present were highlighted in the press, but Mathers’s
himself as an Egyptologist, also attempted to attempt was unsuccessful and the rituals were
“revive” a cult of Isis, not directly related to the eventually published. After his death in 1918,
Golden Dawn, and consisting of sacred representa- Moina took over the leadership of the Alpha et
tions (performed firstly at his house and later on Omega.
stage in a theatre) which aroused some interest in Undoubtedly Mathers must be considered one of
the press and gave him some notoriety. In this the key-figures in English occultism, even if he has
period Mathers’s passion for Celtic culture and tra- published comparatively little. While most of his
ditions, which was shared by other members of the output consists of translations and editions of
Order such as > W.B. Yeats and J.W. Brodie-Innes ancient texts more than original contributions, his
(1848-1923), became more and more prominent as written production did not end there. In fact, much
well. Mathers seems also to have been involved in of the teachings and of the rituals of the original
some anti-English political activities, which were Golden Dawn must be credited to him, together
not infrequent in the more extreme fringes of the with Westcott. Were it only for this reason, his
so-called “Celtic Revival”. This, together with his influence on the evolution of English occultism
authoritative manners in dealing with the problems should be considered fundamental. Moreover, the
of the Order, provoked a feeling of uneasiness and impact of his partial version of Knorr von Rosen-
dissatisfaction among the members of Second roth’s Kabbala Denudata, although unsatisfactory
Order in London. The situation exploded in 1900. by modern standards of scholarship, remained for
Mathers’s decision to reveal that some of the claims a long time the only means for English readers to
about the origins of the Order were untrue and to gain access to the texts of the Zohar, touching
use the young > Aleister Crowley, then a junior therefore a much larger readership than the mere
member of the Order, to restore his authority, occultist one. Finally, Mathers was instrumental,
caused things to precipitate. A revolt erupted in particularly by his rediscovery and publication of
London and a majority of the Second Order mem- ancient grimoires, in the revaluation of magic as a
bers decided to impeach and expel Mathers from legitimate spiritual pursuit, thus opening the way
the Order. A schism ensued which may be consid- for later authors such as > Aleister Crowley, >
ered the end of the “golden age” of the Order. Dion Fortune and Israel Regardie.
While the “rebel” faction underwent another
schism in 1903, the “loyalist” one continued its Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers (ed.), The Kab-
activities under the new name of Alpha et Omega, balah Unveiled, London: George Redway, 1887 ¢
now having its headquarters in Paris. In addition idem (ed.), The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abra-
to this dramatic turn of events, there was the unfor- Melin the Mage, as Delivered by Abraham the Jew
unto his Son Lamech, A.D. 1458, London: J.M.tunate “Horos affair”, in which Mathers was
Watkins, 1898 # R.A. Gilbert (ed.), The Sorcerer and
involved. Mathers was deceived by a couple of
His Apprentice: Unknown Hermetic Writings of S.L.
swindlers, Frank and Editha Jackson (posing as a MacGregor Mathers and J.W. Brodie-Innes, Welling-
Mr and Mrs Horos), who persuaded him to give borough: The Aquarian Press, 1983 ¢ Francis King
them some documents of the Order. Later they used (ed.), Ritual Magic of the Golden Dawn: Works by S.L.

--- Page 209 ---
785 MEAD
MacGregor Mathers and Others, Rochester: Destiny the Theosophical Society’s principal scholar, first
Books, 1997 # Darcy Kiintz (ed.), The Golden Dawn ranging over the field of comparative religion but
Legacy of MacGregor Mathers, Edmonds: Holmes
increasingly concentrating on the Greco-Roman
Publishing Group, 1998.
period. Mead’s books, and his translations with
their extensive commentaries, revealed to English
Lit.: Ithell Colquhoun, The Sword of Wisdom: Mac-
readers a virtually unknown sector of religious his- Gregor Mathers and the Golden Dawn, London:
Neville Spearman, 1975 ¢ R.A. Gilbert, The Golden tory, in which Hermetism, the various Gnostic
Dawn Scrapbook: The Rise and Fall of a Magical schools, > Neoplatonism, the mystery religions of
Order, York Beach: Samuel Weiser, 1997 (Engl. ed.: Mithras and Orpheus, and early Christianity had
Revelations of the Golden Dawn, London: Quantum, shared a common metaphysical ground.
1997) @ Ellic Howe, The Magicians of the Golden
In 1899 Mead married Laura Mary Cooper
Dawn: A Documentary History of a Magical Order
(¢ 1924), daughter of Henry Cooper, C.B., a
1887-1923, Wellingborough: The Aquarian Press,
1985. prominent member of the Bengal Civil Service.
Laura and her sister Isabel Cooper-Oakley (1854-
MARCO PASI 1914) had long been helpers and companions of
Mme. Blavatsky. The Meads had no children.
As General Secretary of the Theosophical Soci-
Mead, George Robert Stowe, ety, Mead had to deal with the furore in 1894-1895
*22.3.1863 Nuneaton, t+ 29.9.1933 caused by the claim of William Quan Judge (185 1-
London 1896) to have received letters from the “Mahat-
mas”. This ended with the departure of most of the
Theosophist and writer on — Gnosticism, > American members. A second scandal was caused
Hermetism, and Christian origins. Son of Robert by > C.W. Leadbeater, who had resigned from
Mead (Colonel in the Ordnance) and his wife the Society when his pedophile activity became
Mary. Educated at Rochester Cathedral School and known. The Society’s President, Annie Besant, was
St. John’s College, Cambridge (B.A., 1884; M.A., infatuated with Leadbeater’s occult powers, and in
1926), reading first Mathematics, then Classics. 1909 reinstated him over the protests of Mead and
Upon graduating, Mead joined the > Theosophical others. Mead then resigned, along with over 700
Society. He studied Oriental philosophy in Oxford English members. Mead’s reactions to these events
(but not as a University member) and visited the were marked, respectively, by skepticism regarding
University of Clermont-Ferrand to research > spir- the hidden Masters who were believed by many to
itualism. His first employment was teaching in a be controlling the Theosophical Society, and by an
public school. From May 1887 onwards he spent uncompromising moral code.
his vacations with > H.P. Blavatsky, and in 1889 Mead and some ex-Theosophists now founded
gave up teaching to become her private secretary. the Quest Society. Mead was the first president, the
This involved answering her correspondence, sub- vice-president being > A.E. Waite. In 1920 the
editing the monthly magazine Lucifer, editing or presidency was assumed by Sir William Barrett,
re-editing Blavatsky’s later writings (including ER.S. (1844-1925), the physicist and psychical
many articles, The Voice of the Silence, and The researcher. A journal was also founded, The Quest
Key to Theosophy), and, as General Secretary for (1909-1930), which attracted a distinguished body
Europe, helping in the development of the Society of academic and literary contributors. These
abroad. included the Tantric scholar Arthur Avalon (= Sir
Mead gave the address at Blavatsky’s cremation John Woodroffe, 1865-1936), Mgr. Robert Hugh
on 10.5.1891. He continued to work for the Theo- Benson (1871-1914), Martin Buber (1874-1965),
sophical Society, editing Lucifer with > Annie A.K. Coomaraswamy (1877-1947), Sir Sarvepalli
Besant (1847-1933), then from 1898 editing it Radhakrishnan (1888-1975), and the Islamicist
alone under the new title The Theosophical Review. Reynold A. Nicholson (1868-1945); also literary
From 1891-1897 he also edited The Vahan, a and artistic figures such as > Gustav Meyrink,
monthly journal for Theosophical notes & queries. Gustav Holst (1874-1934), and > W.B. Yeats. The
He was responsible for the revised edition of death of Laura Mead in 1924 was a hard blow to
Blavatsky’s The Secret Doctrine (2 vols., 1893), Mead, but after sittings with Eileen Garrett (1893-
and for the publication of the formerly secret 1970) and other mediums, he was convinced that
instructions of the Society’s “Esoteric Section” as he had contacted his wife’s spirit. The world-wide
part of “Vol. III” of that work. economic crisis caused the demise of The Quest,
During the 1890s Mead established himself as but at the time of his death Mead was active in a

--- Page 210 ---
MEAD 786
new “Society for Promoting the Study of Reli- 100 B.C.? An Enquiry into the Talmud Jesus Stories,
gions”. His last public appearance was to give a lec- the Toldoth Jeschu, and Some Curious Statements
of Epiphanius — Being a Contribution to the Study
ture on the ~ Mandaeans at the Royal Asiatic
of Christian Origins, London/Benares: TPS, 1903 ¢
Society, of which he had been elected a member. Thrice-Greatest Hermes: Studies in Hellenistic Theos-
Mead’s life’s work is best understood as spring- ophy and Gnosis, Being a Translation of the Extant
ing from his commitment to the “Perennial Philos- Sermons and Fragments of the Trismegistic Literature,
ophy” [> Tradition], of which he first became with Prolegomena, Commentaries, and Notes, 3 vols.,
aware through Blavatsky and the Theosophical London/Benares: TPS, 1906 ¢ Echoes from the Gnosis,
Society. From the beginning he showed little inter- r1 vols., London/Benares: TPS, 1908 ¢ Some Mystical
Adventures, London: J.M. Watkins, 1910 # Quests
est in the glamor of the Mahatmas, the claims of
Old and New, London: G. Bell, 1913 ¢ The Doctrine
occult powers, or the minutiae of karma and > of the Subtle Body in Western Tradition: An Outline of
reincarnation. He understood the term “Theo- what the Philosophers Thought and Christians Taught
sophy” in the sense that others would use “esote- on the Subject, London: J.M. Watkins, 1919 ¢ The
ricism”: as the basis for the deepening and Gnostic John the Baptizer: Selections from the Man-
reconciliation of all religions. Mead’s substantial daean John-Book, with Studies on John and Christian
body of writings is a monument to his brave Origins, the otherwise-Unknown, Arresting Passages
on John and Jesus in the Slavonic Version ofJosephus,
attempt to cross-fertilize the esoteric and the aca-
and other New Material, London: John M. Watkins,
demic approaches. However, his early involvement 1924.
with the Theosophists, and especially his approv-
ing references to Leadbeater’s occult “revelations” Lit.: Boris De Zirkoff (comp.), H.P. Blavatsky Col-
in Did Jesus Live roo B.C.? stifled Mead’s poten- lected Writings, vol. XIII, Wheaton/Madras/London:
tial academic reputation. A virtual conspiracy of Theosophical Publishing House, 1982 (biographical
silence covered his work, broken only by sneering note on Mead, 393-397); vol. XIV, Wheaton/Madras/
references (e.g. in Walter Scott’s edition of the Her- London: Theosophical Publishing House, 1985 (Mead’s
contributions to The Secret Doctrine, xxv-xliv) ¢ R.A.
metica). Mead’s insistence on scholarly standards
Gilbert, “The Idol with Feet of Clay: G.R.S. Mead in
coupled with a respect for the spiritual reality the Theosophical Society”, read at the Temenos Con-
behind religious traditions found its fulfilment in ference, London, 1992, to be published in a collection
the Eranos Conferences, which likewise sprang of Mead’s essays, Quest Books, Wheaton, Ill. # G.R.S.
from Theosophical roots. Mead was invited to Mead, “‘The Quest’ — Old & New: A Retrospect and
Eranos in 1931, and although he did not attend, Prospect” (The Quest Reprint Series 1), London: John
Robert Eisler, a frequent contributor to The Ouest, M. Watkins, 1926 « Arthur H. Nethercot, The Last
Four Lives of Annie Besant, Chicago: Chicago Univer-
formed a link between the two movements.
sity Press, 1963 ¢ James Webb (ed.), A Ouest Anthol-
ogy, New York: Avon Press, 1976.
Simon Magus, An Essay, London/Benares: Theosophi-
cal Publishing Society [hereafter TPS], 1892 # The
World-Mystery: Four Comparative Studies in General JOSCELYN GODWIN
Theosophy, London/Benares: TPS, 1895 # The Upan-
ishads: The Theosophy of the Vedas (co-translator Menander, ca. 80
with J.C. Chatopadhyaya), 2 vols., London/Benares:
TPS, 1896 ¢ Pistis Sophia: A Gnostic Miscellany, Being
for the Most Part Extracts from the Books of the Sav- According to the Christian heresiologists,
iour, to which are Added Excerpts from a Cognate Menander was an early Gnostic [-> Gnosticism]
Literature, London/Benares: TPS, 1896 # Orpheus, magician and teacher, a pupil of > Simon Magus.
London/Benares: TPS, 1896 # Fragments of a Faith He came from Capparetaea in Samaria and worked
Forgotten: Some Short Sketches Among the Gnostics in Antioch, where he, ‘inspired by the demons,
Mainly of the First Two Centuries — A Contribution to
deceived many by his tricks of magic’. Justin Mar-
the Study of Christian Origins Based on the Most
Recently Recovered Materials, (London/Benares: tyr (ca. 150), our first source about Menander, to
TPS, 1900 @ Apollonius of Tyana, the Philosopher- whom we owe this information, adds that ‘he even
Reformer of the First Century A.D.: A Critical Study convinced his followers that they would never die,
of the Only Existing Record of His Life with Some and there are some alive today who, inspired by
Account of the War of Opinion Concerning Him and him, still believe this’ (Apology, I, 26). Irenaeus of
an Introduction on the Religious Associations and
Lyons (ca. 180), Adversus Haereses, I, 23, 5, has
Brotherhoods of the Times and the Possible Influence
more to say about his teachings. According to him, of Indian Thought on Greece, London/Benares: TPS,
1901 @ The Gospels and the Gospel: A Study in the Menander called the highest and completely
Most Recent Results of the Lower and the Higher Crit- unknown divine principle “the First Power”, and
icism, London/Benares: TPS, 1902 # Did Jesus Live claimed that he himself had been sent down by the

--- Page 211 ---
787 MEYER
“Invisible Powers” for the salvation of mankind. A. Rousseau & L. Doutreleau (eds.), Irénée de Lyons:
Just like Simon Magus, he taught that the creation Contre les Hérésies, Livre I (SC 264), Paris: Les Edi-
of the world was due to the angels, who had been tions du Cerf, 1979 (with French translation); Engl.
trans. after the German trans. by W. Foerster in: idem
brought forth by Ennoia, the First Thought. These
(ed.), Gnosis: A Selection of Gnostic Texts, Eng]. trans.
angels were apparently seen as evil beings, respon-
edited by R.McL. Wilson, vol. 1, Oxford: Clarendon
sible for the death of man. They could be overcome Press, 1972, 32-33.
by making use of what Irenaeus calls Menander’s >
“magic”, but which in fact seems to have been no Lit.: A. le Boulluec, La notion d’hérésie dans la littéra-
more than a special kind of baptism. Menander ture grecque. II°-III* siécle, vol. 1, Paris: Etudes Au-
taught that by being baptized “in him” (“in eum gustiniennes, 1985, 80-81 # W. Foerster, “Die ‘ersten
Gnostiker’ Simon und Menander”, in: U. Bianchi (ed.),
baptisma”) his followers immediately received the
The Origins of Gnosticism: Colloquium of Messina,
resurrection: ‘they can no longer die, are imperish- 13-18 April 1966. Texts and Discussions (Studies in
able, eternally young and immortal’. Tertullian, De the History of Religions, 12), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1967,
resurrectione carnis, 5, explicitly says that accord- 190-196 @ A. Hilgenfeld, Die Ketzergeschichte des
ing to Menander the human body was a creation Urchristentums, Leipzig: Fues, 1884, repr. Darmstadt:
of the angels, an idea which is found in several Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1963, 187-190.
Gnostic systems. However, his remark might be no
more than an inference from Irenaeus’ report. In ROELOF VAN DEN BROEK
De anima, 50, 2, Tertullian also refers to Menan-
der’s doctrine of immortality by baptism, but here Mesmerism > Animal Magnetism/
he is evidently dependent on Irenaeus, and the Mesmerism
same holds for all later authors who speak about
Menander.
Meyer, Gustav > Meyrink, Gustav
The relationship between Menander and Simon
Magus is difficult to assess, if it did exist at all. Asa
Samaritan, Simonian and more or less heterodox Meyer, Johann Friedrich von,
Jewish ideas about the structure of the divine world * 12.9.1772 Frankfurt am Main,
and the creation may have influenced him, but he T 27.1.1849 Frankfurt am Main
seems to have developed a salvation doctrine of his
own. He did not, like Simon, claim to be the incar- Trained in law, von Meyer was successively a
nation of the Great Power himself but said that he lawyer in his native city, counselor at the Court of
was sent by the heavenly powers to bring salvation Appeals in Mannheim, senator in 1816, president
to the world. Though the Church Fathers consid- of the Court of Appeals and the Court of Assizes in
ered him the second link in the chain of Gnostic 1827, ambassador of the free towns in the federal
teachers which began with Simon Magus, it may be Diet and thrice mayor of Frankfurt, that is, head of
doubted whether he should be called a Gnostic at the government of the free town. Keenly interested
all. He certainly was not a Christian Gnostic, for in literature, as early as 1794 he published a novel,
there is no indication that the person of Jesus Kallias, and wrote many literary essays that would
played a role of any importance in his system. Most appear in the Teutscher Merkur, Christoph Martin
likely, he came from or was influenced by one of the Wieland’s review. In 1803 he assumed the director-
baptismal movements in rst-century Palestine. The ship of the Frankfurt theater and was responsible
idea of an instant eternal life is reminiscent of there for the first performances of plays by >
the Johannine view of the effect of belief in Christ: Goethe and Schiller. In 1801, an inner illumination
‘the believer possesses eternal life’ (John 6:47), he led to his conversion: the young aesthete discov-
‘has already passed from death to life’ (5:24; cf. int. ered the immense richness of the Holy Scriptures.
al. 10:28; 17:3). That Menander’s followers were In 1806, translations of Cicero’s works still
baptized “in Menander” has a parallel in Paul’s fre- attested to his taste for classical Antiquity, but
quent expression of baptism “in Christ” (e.g. Rom. starting from this period his theosophical publica-
6:3). Baptism as immediately providing the resur- tions began to succeed one another at an acceler-
rection status in this earthly life was also taught by ated rhythm: Der Lichtbote (The Herald of Light,
the 2nd-century Encratites in Alexandria (Clement 1806), Hades (1810), a contribution to > Jung-
of Alexandria, Stromateis, III, 48, 1). Stilling’s theory of spirits, Bibeldeutungen (1812),
a work of biblical exegesis. From 1811 to 1818 he
M. Marcovich, Iustini Martyris Apologiae pro Chris- published reviews in the Heidelbergische Jahr-
tianis (PTS, 38), Berlin-New York: De Gruyter, 1994 ¢ biicher, notably one about Dichtung und Wahrheit

--- Page 212 ---
MEYER 788
by Goethe, which met with great success. In 1819 pensable to the return to unity. His system both
he published an annotated translation of the Bible, takes into account and surpasses a dualism that pre-
intended to correct Luther’s text. It went through sides, at the level of the macrocosm as well as of the
several reprints. From 1818 to 1832, the eleven microcosm, over all the manifestations of creation.
volumes of his Blatter fiir hohere Wahrheit (Papers Centered on the themes of fall and reintegration,
for Higher Truth), which contain the essentials of his thought does not disregard any one of the
his theosophical teaching, came out in the book- three panels of the theosophical triptych: cos-
shops. His work Inbegriff der christlichen Glau- mogony, cosmology and eschatology are cemented
benslehre (Compendium of the Christian Creed, by a profound christology, or rather, christosophy,
1832) summarizes the whole. In 1830, he was the that makes von Meyer one of the most represen-
first to translate and publish in the German lan- tative Christian theosophers of the German rgth
guage the celebrated Sepher Jezira, considered the century.
most ancient document of the Jewish Kabbalah
[> Jewish Influences]. Von Meyer’s text was Hades: Ein Beitrag zur Theorie der Geisterkunde,
Frankfurt: Hermann, 1810 ¢ Bibeldeutungen, Frank-reprinted in 1993. In 1833, his Schliissel zur Offen-
furt: Hermann, 1812 ¢ Die Heilige Schrift in berichtiger
barung St Johannis (Key to the Revelation of
Uebersetzung mit kurzen Anmerkungen, Frankfurt:
St. John) bears witness to his taste for apocalyp- Hermann, 1819-1823 ¢ Blatter fiir hohere Wahrheit,
tic and eschatological studies. The Hesperiden in 12 issues, Frankfurt: Bronner, then Frankfurt:
(1836) assembles the majority of his poems. Up Hermann; then Berlin: Oemigke, 1818-1832 (and see
until his death, he continued to contribute more Blatter fiir hohere Wahrheit: Auswahl in zwei Banden,
than one hundred and forty articles to > Justinus Stuttgart: Steinkopf, 1853) # Wahrnehmungen einer
Seherin, 2 vols., Hamburg: Perthes, 1827-1828 # Das
Kerner’s Blatter aus Prevorst (1831-1839) and
Buch Jezira, Leipzig: Reclam, 1830 ¢ Schliissel zur
Magikon (1840-1851), two reviews dedicated to
Offenbarung St. Johannis, Karlsruhe: G. Braun, 1833.
paranormal phenomena. Besides a gigantic corre-
spondence, he left many manuscripts dedicated to Lit.: Jacques Fabry, Le théosophe Johann Friedrich
somnambulism, > alchemy, > astrology, Kabbalah von Meyer et l’ésotérisme en Allemagne au XIX°"® sié-
[> Jewish Influences], Freemasonry, physiog- cle, Berne: Peter Lang, 1989 « Antoine Faivre, Philoso-
nomy, ~ Naturphilosophie, theology, > Christian phie de la Nature (Physique Sacrée et Théosophie,
theosophy, etc. Two unpublished volumes on the fin XVIII°-XLX° siécles), Paris: Albin Michel, 1996,
305-338.“alchemical Kabbalah” (Cabala magica et theo-
sophica) are the key items in this precious manu-
JACQUES FABRY
script estate.
If von Meyer’s surest reference always remains
the Bible, he never restricts himself to the letter of Meyrink, Gustav (Gustav Meyer),
the Scriptures. Considering the language of the * 19.1.1868 Vienna, + 4.12.1932
Bible to be primarily a pictorial language (Bil- Starnberg (Bavaria)
dersprache), a set of hieroglyphs that must be
decrypted in order to apprehend its infinite rich- Meyrink’s reputation is rooted in literature as
ness, he integrates it into a vast symbolic system well as in the occult [> occult / occultism]. Repre-
that is believed to give the Christian myth its full sentatives of both camps have often been tempted
dimension. He develops in his work a typology that to take from his work only what suited them best
places high value on the Kabbalah, alchemy, arith- and claim the exclusive right to interpreting it
mosophy [+ Number Symbolism], astrology and according to their perspective. It will therefore be
all the traditional esoteric “arts”, in which he sees necessary here to critically reappraise some one-
reflections, albeit often deformed, of the Revela- sided ideas about Meyrink.
tion that God has never ceased communicating to The illegitimate son of a senior Minister of State
humanity. At the same time one finds in him a in Wirttemberg, Baron Karl von Varnhubler, and
Naturphilosophie that owes as much to > Paracel- an actress from Hamburg, Mary Meyer, the very
sus, > Agrippa and > Schelling as it does to Luther. circumstances of Meyrink’s birth may have intro-
As an alternative to the doctrine of sola fides — a duced him to his central theme of a quest for iden-
little too monolithic and dogmatic to his taste — tity. His childhood and youth were spent in the
he erects his own theosophical temple, the two cen- various capital cities where his mother had a bril-
tral columns of which are connected, in a subtle liant career: first Munich, then Hamburg and
play of reciprocal interactions, by the intermediary finally, from 1883 onwards, Prague. A little less
force of the Spirit, as a “third term” deemed indis- than two years later she abandoned Meyrink there,

--- Page 213 ---
789 MEYRINK
henceforth showing a total lack of concern for 1905 he married Philomena Bernt, which whom he
him. Meyrink completed his studies at secondary had two children, Sibylle and Harro).
school, then attended classes at the Academy of If his mania for secret rites had hitherto been,
Trade, before setting up the “Meyer & Morgen- for the most part, a way to épater le bourgeois,
stern” Bank. Meanwhile he was leading a chaotic Meyrink now deliberately turned towards esoteric
love life, marked by the eccentricities of a dandy doctrine; he saw in it a mode of addressing the
lifestyle. It was during this period that what he basic questions of life, particularly relevant in the
called his “occult mania” started, characterized by context of the impending world conflict. This new
the intermingling of a genuine spiritual quest and a stage in his career drew him away from the Sim-
taste for provocation. In this field he left no road plicissimus mindset, and he became known as an
untravelled, no stone unturned: > spiritualism, eccentric character in Munich literary circles,
theosophy [> Theosophical Society], > alchemy, where he mixed with Franz Wedekind, Erich Miih-
and yoga are among the more prominent sub- sam and Heinrich Mann, among others. His first
jects he explored. In his personal pantheon we novel, Der Golem (1915), was highly successful
find William Crookes along with > Helena P. and brought him a certain financial security; he
Blavatsky, Camille Flammarion and > Sweden- used the opportunity to withdraw from society to
borg, along with many others. His interests were his property near Lake Starnberg. Several other
not restricted to books, but led him to try out all novels followed: Das griine Gesicht (The Green
kinds of spiritual techniques among his friends, Face, 1916) and Walpurgisnacht (1917). Meyrink’s
in addition to establishing personal connections fame increased as the World War progressed, but
with some of the spiritual guides of his time — see, the writer now stayed away from the agitation and
in this regard, his correspondence with Alois fashions of contemporary literary life and assumed
Mailander, > Annie Besant, > BO Yin Ra — and the role of an initiate, ‘light years away from what
joining a large number of paramasonic [~ Freema- priggish pedants of all kinds understand art and lit-
sonry] and rosicrucian [~ Rosicrucianism] move- erature to be’. He kept writing novels after the
ments (including the Prague Theosophical Lodge, World War, notably Der weisse Dominikaner (The
founded by K. Weinfurter). As the years went by, White Dominican, 1921) and Der Engel vom west-
the banker G. Meyer, a regular customer at the lichen Fenster (The Angel of the Western Window,
Continental and the Ungelt, two cafés with a repu- 1927). On December the 4th, 1932, a few days
tation as meeting-places for eccentric artists and after the death of his son, he serenely took leave of
authors, gained notoriety among the Prague bour- his relatives and retired to his bedroom. Sitting in
geoisie for his outrageous lifestyle. In 1901, a scan- front of the open window, stripped to the waist in
dal on account of a duel with a garrison officer was spite of the cold, he died at dawn as he had pre-
used as pretext for a violent smear campaign dicted, with his eyes fixed on the rising sun.
against him, which even caused him to be thrown Apart from a few autobiographical writings,
into prison for a few days and ruined his career. which are not without a certain amount of self-
At this precise moment he started writing: his derision (see e.g. Fakine, 1907; Wie ich in Prag
first scathing texts he sent to the famous Munich Gold machen wollte, 1928; Telephonverbindung
satirical review Simplicissimus. Due to their mit dem Traumland, 1928), Meyrink’s occult ideas
provocative power and stylistic originality, these may be discerned most clearly below the surface in
short stories — later published in one volume under his fictional works, and must be seen as one of the
the title Des deutschen Spiessers Wunderhorn foundations of his characteristic approach to fan-
(1913) — written in the genre of the grotesque and tasy literature. In all his great novels born from the
violently denouncing philistine and chauvinistic cataclysmic experience of World War I, the fantas-
attitudes, were an immediate success. They at- tic element in the plot takes its starting point in a
tracted the attention of critics like Max Brod, legend that becomes reality. Each one of the legends
Thomas Mann, Kurt Tucholsky and Hermann used by the author tells the story of an irruption of
Hesse. In 1904 Meyrink was forced to leave Prague violence, an outbreak of destructive fury: the mad
and decided to settle for some time in Vienna, Golem who roams the narrow streets of the Prague
where he was seen with Fritz Eckstein and his set. ghetto every thirty-three years (Der Golem), an
Here he became editor-in-chief of the review Der apocalyptic cataclysm punctuated by the recurring
liebe Augustin. After that enterprise failed, in appearances of Ahasverus the wandering Jew (Das
1907, he went to Munich, where he settled perma- griine Gesicht), or the bloody figure of the Hussite
nently and at last led a serene family life (after the leader Jan Zizka returning again and again to his
divorce of his first wife, Hedwig Aloisa Certl, in old haunts (Walpurgisnacht). As he retells the leg-

--- Page 214 ---
MEYRINK 79°
end, confirming its historicity, the author provides lucidity’, and whether ‘each person is not both his
a mythical explanation for outbreaks of violence in own ancestor and his own heir’.
history. This procedure provides comfort since it It seems too simplistic to maintain (as many
gives meaning to what might seem meaningless; commentators have done) a strict division between
but it is disconcerting as well, because the explana- Meyrink the satirist, who wrote for Simplicissimus,
tion tends to present the individual as merely the and Meyrink the esoteric novelist, the author of
plaything of dark forces. This is where the occult Der Golem, and then minimize the importance of
theme comes in. On the symbolic level, the novelist the former. Those who decide, peremptorily, to
introduces a specific doctrinal structure (with a establish this division often make it part of a value
kabbalistic tinge in Der Golem, yoga in Das griine judgment and an ideological estimation. Yet the
Gesicht, the Vedas in Walpurgisnacht). A wide division appears unfounded in the light of the essay
range of symbols and forms of diction are used, but An der Grenze des Jenseits (On the Border of the
the message is always the same: the individual, Beyond, 1923), in which Meyrink reveals some of
while faced with the violence of history that may his deepest convictions. In his opinion the occult,
well rob him of his own identity, can still aspire to regardless of the specific tradition from which it
a spiritual awakening which will in the end allow is approached, has always provided a way of
him to save that identity. What we have here is a thinking which is simultaneously subversive and
patient conquest of salvation through a form of liberating. The notion of “suprasensitivity”, as he
self-knowledge, which is attained by means of an understands it, can only be defined by facing a dou-
encounter with one’s Double, and culminates in the ble challenge: that of positivism, on the one hand,
magical union of ideal love (represented in the and of theological vision on the other (in all their
above-mentioned novels by the couples Pernath- various forms). Meyrink suggests that — on the con-
Mirjam, Hauberrisser-Eva, and Flugbeil-Liesel dition that we understand this double challenge of
respectively): the perfection of a Mysterium con- positivism and theological vision on his part, and
junctionis, reflecting a nostalgia for the androgy- keep an open eye with respect to all the counterfeits
nous life of the hermaphrodite, or Baphomet. This and trickery of “pseudo-prophets” who hide their
occult concept is the basic source of inspiration and secret thirst for power behind a flood of words
provides the underlying structure for each journey of wisdom — the occult entails a set of doctrines
of initiation in Meyrink’s novels. While the hero which alone make it possible to envision genuine
meets various wise men during his adventurous personal development: ‘the occult feeds on the
journey (under the guise of archivists and scholars), instinctive desire for liberty which is at the heart of
ultimately his crowning glory or spiritual rebirth every man’.
will be due to his own efforts. Accordingly it is just
as inappropriate to try and reduce these novels to Gesammelte Werke in sechs Banden, Leipzig, 1917
the doctrines they teach, as some commentators (Der Golem, Das griine Gesicht, Walpurgisnacht, Des
have done, as it is to dismiss these doctrines as obso- deutschen Spiessers Wunderhorn I. u.2.Teil, Fleder-
lete artefacts. It is more correct to speak here of an mduse) ¢ Der weisse Dominikaner, Wien, 1921 # Der
Engel vom westlichen Fenster, Leipzig, 1927 ¢ Das
occult discourse set in narrative form. This proce- Haus zur letzten Latern: Nachgelassenes und Ver-
dure was sometimes less successful from a literary streutes, Munchen: Langen-Miller, 1973.
point of view, as in Der weisse Dominikaner, with
its taoist background; but it could also lead to the Lit.: Helga Abret, Gustav Meyrink conteur, Bern/
masterly, breathtaking construction of Meyrink’s Frankfurt a.M: Peter Lang, 1976 « Yvonne Caroutch
last novel, Der Engel vom westlichen Fenster (ed.), Cahier de Il’Herne: Gustav Meyrink, Paris:
Editions de Herne, 1976 # Eduard Frank, Gustav
(1927). Thanks to its narrative structure based ona
Meyrink, Werk und Wirkung, Biidingen-Gettenbach:
mirror effect — we read the autobiographical works Avalun-Verlag, 1957 ¢ Manfred Lube, “Gustav
of John Dee at the same time as the narrator, who Meyrink als Literat in Prag, Wien und Miinchen”, in:
receives them as a legacy -, a whole network of Rein A. Zondergeld (ed.), Phaicon 3: Almanach der
coincidences linking past and present, legend and phantastischen Literatur, Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp,
reality, appears. This causes the protagonist, who is 1978, 70-92 @ Jan Christoph Meister, Hypostasierung:
deciphering his grandfather’s manuscript, to have Die Logik mythischen Denkens im Werk Gustav
Meyrinks nach 1907, Berne: Peter Lang, 1987 ¢ Jean-
trouble working out whether he is really himself or
Jacques Pollet, “image de Gustav Meyrink dans les
whether he is his grandfather, whether he is still lettres allemandes”, Etudes Germaniques i (1977), 30-
alive or already dead, ‘whether the present is noth- 39 idem, ‘Gustav Meyrink: l’enjeu de l’occultisme’,
ing else but the sum of past instants, in a moment of Recherches Germaniques 16 (1986), 100-118 ¢ idem,

--- Page 215 ---
791 MICHAEL SCOT
“Le satiriste et |’ésotériste: Gustav Meyrink interpréte thought is extremely eclectic and does not yet fol-
la Grande Guerre”, in: J. Benay & G. Ravy (eds.), Ecri- low the rules of philosophy, theology, and science
tures et langages satiriques en Autriche, Berne: Peter as set down by Christian Scholasticism. In
Lang, 1999, 263-276 Frans Smit, Gustav Meyrink:
Michael’s text, > astrology is considered to be the
Auf der Suche nach dem Ubersinnlichen, Miinchen/
Wien: Langen Miller, 1988 ¢ Marianne Wiinsch, “Auf practical science of the philosopher through which
der Suche nach der verlorenen Wirklichkeit: Zur Logik he resembles a magus; for astrology is the art or sci-
einer phantastischen Welt”, in: Gustav Meyrink, ence that offers infallible tools for mastering the
Der Engel vom westlichen Fenster, Miinchen/Wien: celestial powers that govern the world.
Langen-Miller, 1975, 528-558. Astrology is the ‘wisdom in man’ (sapientia in
homine): a type of knowledge produced by the
JEAN-JACQUES POLLET influx from the sun and moon — ‘those are indeed
the two bodies that illuminate the souls of men and
Michael Scot, * before 1198 place turn them towards their cause; they are the road to
unknown, ¢ after 1236 place unknown truth’. Thus the principles of the science and of the
doctrine of wisdom ‘are acquired through revela-
An eminent astrologer, Michael Scot’s activity is tion from the immutable spirit, received from
documented from 1198 to 1216, and from 1221 to the sun’, and actually represent the divine wis-
1224, years in which he was translating the various dom. Furthermore, ‘infallible wisdom is acquired
books of Aristotle’s De animalibus and perhaps De through the sun’, while ‘through the moon is
anima and other works of the philosopher. In 1224 acquired the virtue of wisdom or the knowledge of
Pope Honorius III elected him Archbishop of good and evil’.
Cashel in Ireland, but he declined the position. He In this context astronomy or astrology becomes
was definitely active at the court of Frederick II the philosophical science par excellence, which
from 1227 to 1236. Michael Scot is known as the permits us to acquire the marvelous divine wis-
translator of works by Arab scientists, including dom that manifests in creation, because astrology
Alfarabi’s De ortu scientiarum, Alpetragio’s De teaches us how to master this cosmic influence.
motibus coelorum, which he finished translating at Michael speaks of this concept of astronomy-
Toledo probably on August 12, 1217, and some astrology as a philosophical and religious science in
philosophical works such as the Commentary on a passage of the Introductorium maius: it is the
the Sphaera of Sacrobosco. He also authored an foundation of all the other sciences because it fur-
important encyclopedic “Introduction to Astrol- nishes them with their common basis (subiectum
ogy” (Liber introductorius maior in astrologiam), commune) which is the ens (being). He presents a
in which he collected all the encylopedic knowl- classification of the speculative sciences, among
edge of his time, and was strongly influenced by which astronomy, together with astrology as
Greek philosophy as well as by Jewish, Arab, and its practical aspect, occupies a privileged position,
Christian thought. Many spurious works have because it is considered the universal science of the
been attributed to him. > Dante places him among motion of the celestial intelligences, from which
the Magi, considering him the man who ‘delle every type of influence derives.
magiche frodi seppe il gioco’ (knew how to play Michael Scot’s definition makes it clear that
magical tricks). he considers astronomy to be the same as astrol-
Michael Scot’s Liber introductorius in astrolo- ogy; but there are also differences, and some very
giam is directed at any beginner who wants to learn curious details. Astronomy takes its name from
the astronomical art. His intention is to treat many “astrum”, which is a great star — or so he writes —
arguments about the celestial and terrestrial and from “nomos”, which signifies “science”, i.e.,
worlds, which are the secrets of the philosophers rule. In the same way, astronomy is the law of the
and concern the astronomical art. The Liber intro- stars (lex astrorum), or even the science from the
ductorius contains two further sections: the Liber stars (de astris); whereas astrology is the discourse
particularis (including De mirabilibus mundi) and (sermo) about the stars, so that it is a sermocinatio
the Physiognomica. His Introductorium maius in de astris. It is also called thus because of “astrum”,
astrologiam is characterized by a Christian-Arab- star, and “logos”, which means a discourse or ser-
Jewish syncretism, connected to the tradition of mon about the stars. Moreover, there are two terms
12th century Toledo and to the compilations of that derive from astronomy: “astronomus”, the
translators such as Herman of Carinthia, John man who knows the art, and “astronomista”, the
Ispalense, and Gerard of Cremona. This type of man who imitates the art of astronomy (idest homo

--- Page 216 ---
MICHAEL SCOT 792
imitans artem astronomiae). Two terms also derive Scot’s Arabic-Latin Translation, ed. Aafke M.I. van
from astrology: “astrologus”, the man capable of Oppenraay, 2 vols., Leiden: Brill, 1992, 1998 # Michael
Scot, Liber introductorius maior, Paris, ms. BN, nouv.
mastering this art (bomo utens haberi artem), and
Acq., lat 1401 ¢ idem, Munich, CLM, lat. 10268.
“astrologista”, the man who copies its vestiges as
best he can (hic astrologista idest imitans vestigia Lit.: C. Burnett, “Michael Scot and the Transmission
ipsius artis suo posse). The astrologer is the man of Scientific Culture from Toledo to Bologna via
who uses instruments such as the astrolabe, which the Court of Frederick II Hohenstaufen”, in: Science at
is ‘that round tablet resembling the sky, through the Court of Frederick II, Micrologus 2 (1994), 1o1-
which it is possible to identify the position of the 126 P. Morpurgo, “Fonti di Michele Scoto”, in:
sun, the ascending and descending signs of the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, Rendiconti della
Classe di Scienze Morali, Storiche, Filosofiche, series 8,
other planets, and the ruling hour’.
38 (1983), 59-71 # Lynn Thorndike, Michael Scot,
Necromancy is included within astronomy, London, 1965.
being an operation based on the invocation of the
spirits of demons, contained in the hierarchy of the GRAZIELLA FEDERICI VESCOVINI
48 celestial images (the 12 signs of the zodiac, plus
the 36 constellations of the northern and southern
hemispheres). But Michael Scot, a believer in this Milosz, Oscar Vladislas, * 28.5.1877
matter, distinguishes the multitude of spirits that Czercia, Lithuania (15.5 according to the
reside in the 48 images from the divine sphere that Julian calendar then in use), t 2.3.1939
is supersensible, incorporeal, and immobile, inas- Fontainebleau (Seine et Marne)
much as the images are natural, physical, ter-
restrial, and controlled by the sun and moon. On his father’s side Milosz belonged to the Baltic
Moreover, he writes: ‘The multitude and order of landed aristocracy, the family property being situ-
the angels differs from the multitude of the stars; ated in a region annexed by Russia. His father,
their greatness differs from the greatness of heaven, violent and unbalanced in character, had led an
sun, and earth. For the former are mobile, the lat- adventurous life culminating in marriage with a
ter immobile’. The mobile either moves by itself Polish Jew, Marie Rosalie Rosenthal, who was
(per se), and is the angel or soul, or else it moves by rejected out of anti-Semitism by the entire family
means of another (per aliud), like the natural and locality. His mother came from a cultivated
beings compounded of body and spirit; stone on background which had produced several rabbis,
the other hand is immobile. but she became isolated in her unhappiness and left
Michael’s idea of wisdom is that it is a revelation the young and emotional Oscar to his solitude, at
within man (sapientia in homine) which derives the side of a father who terrified him. Oscar lived at
through procession from the celestial spirit, via the the chateau until he was twelve, then left to study
intermediate hierarchies. His Liber introductorius at the Lycée Janson de Sailly in Paris. He had no
and Liber particularis, with their colorful demo- contact with his mother’s people until 1906, after
nology and angelology, are a kind of encyclopedia his father’s death. The maternal milieu soon disil-
of > magic, astrology, and demonology, with lusioned him, but he remained fascinated by Jewish
a structure that is at the same time Neoplatonic culture, and the Bible in Hebrew remained his bed-
[> Neoplatonism], Platonic, patristic, Christian, side book. Familiar with the literary and social life
and Gnostic [> Gnosticism], influenced by > of Paris, he wrote poetry and plays, participating in
Augustine and by Hermetic [> Hermetic Litera- the foundation of the “Société des artistes polon-
ture], Arab, and Jewish sources. The philosophers ais” (Society of Polish artists, r911). In 1916 he
and theologians of the second half of the 13th was drafted into the Russian troops fighting in
century were probably reacting against it when France and attached to the Ministry of Foreign
they developed a different adaptation of astrology Affairs, where his concern for Lithuania developed.
to philosophy and theology, as for instance in He represented that country as a diplomat until his
the Speculum astronomiae attributed to > Alber- French naturalization in 1936. Milosz’s political
tus Magnus, and later > Peter of Abano (1250- testament is found in Deux messianismes poli-
1315) in his Lucidator dubitabilium astronomiae tiques (Two political messianisms, 1927), which
or astrologiae. also contains memoirs of his youth in the Parisian
occultist world; but soon the loss of all his property
Al-Bitrogi, De motibus caelorum, translatio Scoti, ed. in the Russian Revolution precipitated a spiritual
FE Carmody, Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of Cali- revelation, described in the “Epistle to Storge”
fornia Press, 1954 @ Aristotle, De animalibus, Michael (Revue de Hollande, January 1917). This profound

--- Page 217 ---
723) MNEMONICS
transformation took place in a heightened state of the divinities — as well as the abstract concepts — of
prayer and meditation on religious texts such as Justice, Truth and Memory were very closely
The Imitation of Christ or on esoteric ones such as related. Aletheia, or Truth, was the “absence
> Swedenborg’s. Milosz’s Ars Magna (The great of oblivion” and therefore Aletheia was she who,
art, 1924) and Arcanes (Arcana, 1927) contain the with the help of Mnemosyne, brought to life once
essence of his message, before he condemned him- again the glorious acts of gods and heroes, in this
self to silence a few years later. It presents itself as a way saving them from oblivion.
both metaphysical and poetic speculation on tradi- The myth of Mnemosyne captures the central
tional symbolic themes, especially the symbolism importance of memory in a society which relied
of numbers [> Number Symbolism] and the Kab- upon the oral transmission of knowledge, for
balah [> Jewish Influences]. By means of the where there is no written language, memory be-
method developed here, he believed he could deci- comes essential, indeed sacred. The function of
pher the sacred texts, as in Clefs pour l’Apocalypse memory was to hand down knowledge and a pre-
(Keys for the Apocalypse, printed at his own cise set of values from one generation to the next;
expense in 1938). Milosz’s “literary” mission was by thus preserving the sense of identity of its mem-
complemented by social action: in 1919 he bers, it assured the survival of the community.
founded Catholic “apostolic groups”, hierarchical Poetry was uniquely suited to this purpose, for a
models of a society regenerated on traditional prin- poem could be recited or sung in such a way that
ciples, and for several years he participated in the the words, together with the - music and the
secret society of the “Veilleurs”. movements of the body which accompanied them,
would be imprinted indelibly — almost magically —
L’Amoureuse initiation, Paris: Bernard Grasset, 1910 ¢ upon the mind of the listener. During his recitation
Ars Magna, Paris: Alice Sauerwein, 1924 Arcanes the poet was in direct communication with the
(La vie des lettres et des arts, May 1926), Paris: Muses, the daughters of Mnemosyne, both because
Silvaire, 1994.
he was drawing exclusively upon memory and
because the subject of his verses was not of his Lit.: Jacques Buge, Milosz en quéte du divin, Paris:
Nizet, 1963 ¢@ Jean Bellemin-Noél, La poésie—philoso- making but had been transmitted to him from the
phie de Milosz, Paris: Klincksieck, 1977 # Alexandra past, and his role was to merely reinterpret and re-
Charbonnier, Milosz, l’étoile au front, Paris: Dervy, elaborate the words for his listeners.
1993- This situation changed with the spread of written
language and the birth of the polis, the Greek city.
JEAN-PIERRE LAURANT The obvious advantages of writing tended to
diminish the importance — and therefore the sacred
Mnemonics nature — of memory. Nevertheless the need to
remember survived and indeed assumed a new
t. MEMORY IN THE CLASSICAL importance in the life of the city, where the orator
WoRLD 2. THE MEDIEVAL and the poet had to recite their speeches and poems
TRADITION: RHETORIC, ETHICS AND in public in an effective manner and without read-
SPIRITUALITY 3. MEMORY AND THE ing them. Thus, memory became an art which
SEARCH FOR UNIVERSAL KNOWLEDGE could be taught and practised.
According to classical tradition the inventor of
1. MEMORY IN THE CLASSICAL the art of memory was Simonides of Ceos, a lyric
WORLD poet from the pre-Socratic age (5 56-568 BC). Leg-
In Greek mythology Memory — Mnemosyne - end recounts that Simonides was summoned by
was a goddess beloved of Zeus who gave birth to Scopa, a nobleman of Thessaly, to entertain his
the Muses, the divinities who would preside over guests at a banquet by reciting his poetry. In the
poets and their art. Mnemosyne was the guardian eulogy dedicated to his host, Simonides inserted
not only of the secrets of beauty, but also those of some lines in praise of the gods Castor and Pollux.
knowledge, since in her hands she held the threads Scopa was intensely irritated by this digression and
of the past, the present and the future. The poet’s paid the poet only one half of the agreed-upon sum
inspiration was believed to come directly from the for his troubles, suggesting that he ask Castor
Muses, and hence he was considered akin to the and Pollux for the remainder since he had praised
oracular priestess through whom the deities spoke them so well. At this point a servant came to tell
or the king responsible for dispensing justice. Simonides that two young gentlemen were waiting
Indeed, to the ancient Greeks it was obvious that for him at the door. The poet left the banquet hall

--- Page 218 ---
MNEMONICS 794
but to his surprise found no one outside. At this Indeed the mind, and in particular the memory,
very moment the roof of the banquet hall col- began to be conceived as a space divided into niches
lapsed, killing everyone inside. The bodies recov- where tangible images could be cached, either
ered from the ruins were so horrendously mutilated temporarily or permanently. Thence sprang the
that they could only be identified by Simonides metaphors which would forever afterwards be
based upon where they had been found; thanks to associated with memory — the treasure trove of
the art of memory, he was able to remember the knowledge, the bottomless cupboard or knapsack
exact order in which the guests had been sitting of remembrances. The very nature of writing pro-
around the banquet table. vided the masters of memory with an example of a
Tradition also affirms that Simonides was the combinatorial art of remarkable efficacy. They
first poet in history to ask to be paid for his verses, pointed out how with a finite and indeed relatively
and the first to draw an analogy between poetry small number of signs it was possible to write all
and painting. According to Plutarch, Simonides the words of a language, and suggested that by the
defined painting as silent poetry and poetry as a same principle any number of memories could be
speaking picture (De gloria Atheniensium, 3). This fixed in the mind based on combinations of a lim-
tradition sheds important light on the nature of the ited number of images.
art of memory, which is based not only on an Places, images and a fixed order were the com-
ordered disposition but also on the creation of ponents that formed the basis of the art of memory.
mental images. In likening poetry to painting, it is The techniques themselves sprang from a careful
clear that the Greeks had already recognised that observation of the way in which memory sponta-
the two arts both involved the creation of images, neously functioned: the art of memory or memoria
and one of the fundamental techniques of the art of localis or artificial memory consisted of a set of
memory would be to associate words with images, techniques designed to reinforce the natural pow-
translating one into the other and back again. ers of memory and the mind. Next to these mental
Naturally, remnants of the archaic origins of elements, we find in many treatises on the art of
poetry lingered for many centuries, with poets memory instructions of a medical nature on how
continuing to invoke the Muses, Apollo and the memory might be improved. Based on the prin-
Mnemosyne for inspiration. Orpheus, the musi- ciple that the functioning of memory took place in
cian-poet who descended into Hades to free his a precise location in the brain but that its effects
beloved Eurydice, would become the prototype of could be felt throughout the body — a corollary to
the magical, life-giving force of poetry, of the cos- the system of humours whose proportions deter-
mic powers which found expression in its rhythm mined a person’s health and temperament — pre-
and which could draw animals and even lifeless scriptions for herbs and drugs, as well as advice on
stones in its dancing wake. The music, rhyme, ges- the best way to eat, sleep, wash and make love,
tures and movements that accompanied song con- could be found.
tinued to be recognised as powerful instruments of Thus the complex practices of the art of memory
memory even after the invention of writing and, were suspended between two poles, the mental and
later, of the printing press. the corporeal — at one end the fashioning of mental
The spread of writing also profoundly influenced images and at the other the use of medicine and
the way in which the mind, and therefore memory, diet. The art of memory was situated in a border-
was perceived. Parallels were soon drawn between line territory — its procedures were based in part on
the practice of mnemonics and the acts of read- universal laws concerning the functioning of the
ing and writing. The scribe, following an orderly mind, and in part on the idiosyncratic responses of
sequence of lines, engraves on the wax tablet the the individual mind. The art of memory acted at the
signs or letters that form words. After a lapse of confines between spontaneity, automatism and
time the tablet would restore to him the message conscious action. Mastery of the body through the
that it had been entrusted with. In the same way the medical arts and mastery of the mind through the
art of memory taught the user how to fix in his imagines agentes, the art of memory vouchsafed
mind an orderly itinerary of loci where imagines passage into an unmarked territory where the body
agentes were to be placed, images that were associ- and psyche could meet and interact in a mysterious
ated with specific objects or words that one wished symbiosis.
to remember. It should be possible to revisit these The art of memory sought to exploit the power
loci later and retrieve from each one the images that of the emotions and passions as well. Since it was
had been placed there; each image would then sur- based on the use of arresting imagines agentes —
render the memories that had been entrusted to it. images capable of striking the imagination and

--- Page 219 ---
W2S MNEMONICS
arousing sentiments and desires — the authors of free play of the > imagination in the construction
treatises on memory suggested using the images of of its images. Mnemonic techniques were not lim-
persons who were the objects of intense love or ited to the passive filing of intact memories. They
desire or hate; the stronger their emotional impact, often involved an ample measure of creativity, for
the greater their mnemonic power. Another cate- the human mind is capable not only of storing, but
gory of memorable images, and one which came to also of transforming its memories in an infinite
be widely used in the second half of the 16th cen- number of ways.
tury, was that of the grotesque or cruel. In While Aristotle linked memory to the experience
mnemonic practices, therefore, the rational and of the senses, Plato incorporated it into his meta-
controlled part of the mind interacted with its physical vision of the world. Before descending to
darker, emotional side. earth and binding itself to a sentient body, the soul
Furthermore, imagines agentes signified images was immersed in the contemplation of the world of
wearing masks, just like the actors in a theatre. As pure ideas. Retrieving memories of that ideal world
such they could help to conserve memories, but by was the task of the philosopher, but in order to do
assuming a disguise and presenting themselves in so he had to battle against the darkening effects of
another form. Thus, from its very origins the art of oblivion, retracing the universals that lay beyond
the theatre exerted a considerable influence on the the mortal world and its bewildering multiplicity
techniques of memory. The mind could be thought of particulars, seeking beauty and light beyond
of as a stage on which a play was being presented, the obscurity of the material. According to Plato
and indeed one of the techniques most frequently remembrance was the practice of anamnesis, a
used to aid the memory was the construction of journey backwards that would eventually bring the
dialogues. philosopher into contact with the original - and
The Greeks did not only recognise memory as one divine — component of human nature. The teach-
of the human arts; they sought to understand how ings of Plato and the Neoplatonists would have an
it functioned, deciphering its modalities and laws, important influence on the mnemonic tradition,
and thus discovering its close relationship to the particularly during the 16th century.
world of dreams as well as that of artistic creativity.
Aristotle was profoundly interested in the nature of 2. THE MEDIEVAL TRADITION:
memory. In De memoria et reminiscentia (45 1b) he RHETORIC, ETHICS AND
considered by what spontaneous process the mind SPIRITUALITY
managed to recall those things that it had half for- The fundamental principles of mnemonics devel-
gotten. It involved, he decided, a chain of associa- oped by the Greeks were preserved and transmitted
tions. One memory would evoke another and the through the texts of the great masters of rhetoric:
image of one thing would summon another, if Cicero, Quintilian, and above all the anonymous
between the two there was a relationship of either author of the treatise Ad Caium Herennium, long
similarity or opposition or contiguity. These three identified (albeit mistakenly) as Cicero himself.
laws of association could therefore be used to This philological error had important repercus-
enhance the natural capacity of one’s memory. In De sions during the Middle Ages because it provided
insomniis (45 8b) he noted that a similar process was theoretical support for a gradual shift in emphasis
responsible for the visions that one saw in dreams. from memory as handmaiden to the rhetorical arts
The art of memory would utilise these three to memory as a process with an ethical significance.
laws to construct images capable of giving rise to a This shift arose out of a medieval reinterpreta-
chain of associations, thereby allowing the mind tion of the classical tenets of rhetoric. In De inven-
to retrieve the memories to which they had been tione Cicero wrote that memory, intelligence and.
attached. The three laws of association which Aris- foresight (memoria, intelligentia, providentia) were
totle recognised as essential for memory are very the essential components of the virtue Prudence
similar to the two types of associations identified by (prudentia). The wise man was he who, steeped in
the linguist Roman Jakobson (in his work Essais de knowledge of the past, could understand the pres-
linguistique générale, Les Editions de Minuit: Paris ent and make prudent provisions for the future.
1964) as governing the two fundamental figures of Medieval philosophers referred to De inventione
speech, i.e. metaphor and metonymy. Jakobson as Cicero’s First Rhetoric and the treatise Ad
observed that associations based on similarity or Herennium, which appeared to be its obvious
opposition underlie the metaphor, while associa- sequel, was known as Cicero’s Second Rhetoric.
tions based on contiguity produce metonymy. Since the First Rhetoric clearly assigned an ethical
In fact, the art of memory allowed space for the valence to memory, declaring it to be a part of

--- Page 220 ---
MNEMONICS 796
Prudence, by reasonable extension the practices were phantasmata — images which had not only a
of artificial memory described in the Second mental but also a material consistency.
Rhetoric could be considered exercises in the virtue Finally, in the Middle Ages techniques of mem-
of Prudence. ory were closely linked to the techniques of medi-
Such great medieval philosophers as > Albertus tation that were used to develop a particular “force
Magnus and Thomas Aquinas discussed at length of thought”. This force was used to build structures
the concepts of loci, order and imagines agentes in in the mind — temples, tabernacles, palaces, gar-
this new ethical context, in the part of their works dens, trees, stairways — which could then be used to
dedicated to the cardinal virtue of Prudence. Since design a spiritual itinerary. Each stopping place
in medieval philosophy rhetoric and ethics were so along this itinerary represented an advance in
closely tied, the arguments used to defend the knowledge and a step forward in a gradual moral
figures of rhetoric (metaphor, allegory, poetic transformation which would culminate in the mys-
fables) from the accusation that they were mere tical experience of a union with God. In the ecstasy
devices of deception were the same as those used to of this moment the images themselves would cease
justify the use of imagines agentes in the art of to function, evaporating like mist because they are
memory. Man is weak, the moral philosophers sus- tied to the material world, to the specific condition
tained, and generally incapable of understanding of human nature and therefore to its limits.
and remembering abstract concepts. Metaphors, + Dante Alighieri’s Divine Comedy may be seen
allegories and imagines agentes were instruments as a wonderful representation of this metaphysical
that could be used to help him overcome this weak- process. In it the author recounts his journey as a
ness since they lent concrete form to the abstract pilgrim through the hereafter, where he meets a
principles which he needed to embrace in order to series of figures embodying all of the vices and
gain eternal salvation. It was for this reason, St virtues of man. As he makes his way through Hell,
Thomas wrote in Summa theologica (I, 1, 9 and II Purgatory and Paradise he gradually becomes
Ilae, 9.49 to 2m), that God chose to express him- morally purified and achieves a clearer understand-
self in the form of parables and metaphors in the ing of the divine order governing the cosmos. When
Bible. he finally reaches the end of his journey, he is
The classical art of memory was thus grafted rewarded with a dazzling vision of the Holy Trinity
onto a tradition that gradually evolved within the and writes: ‘Da quinci innanzi il mio veder fu
enclaves of the monasteries of Europe, a tradition maggio / che ‘I parlar nostro, ch’a tal vista cede, / e
in which the functions and properties of memory cede la memoria a tanto oltraggio (From that
were assigned an important moral dimension. The moment onwards my vision was greater/than
techniques of memory in turn influenced the way in human speech, which was overwhelmed by this
which classical and biblical texts were read, assim- vision/ and memory too was overwhelmed by this
ilated, transformed and finally incorporated into so great force; Paradiso, XXXIII, 55-57). From
the reader’s personal repository of knowledge, to this passage we see that, for Dante, the use of places
be drawn upon later as needed to produce new and images to give concrete form to spiritual expe-
texts or to arrive at decisions in the moral sphere. rience was essential, both in order to describe and
Regarded in this light a literary text was not a recount and to remember it. Writing and memory
closed and static entity, but rather an open-ended were together used to construct the itinerary of the
work which would never be definitively finished: it pilgrim. The crisis provoked by his final vision of
was a res (object) which would pass across times God clearly illustrates both the power and the lim-
and generations, and function as an auctoritas — an itations of words and memory.
authoritative text and also one that could be broken In short, the Christian world inherited the classi-
up into fragments, digested and re-combined into cal tradition of the art of memory and re-elabo-
other forms and other models of behaviour. rated it to reflect the new doctrine of the Church.
This process of re-elaboration drew upon both The issue of memory had an importance that
corporeal and spiritual elements. Texts were in fact extended far beyond the principles and practices of
read aloud, dictated to scribes and copyists, and mnemonics, however, for it permeated the mass,
even sung on liturgical occasions. Furthermore, in the liturgy and the private life of the believer. To
accordance with the most widespread medical and remember the sacrifice of Christ, the terrible pun-
philosophical theories of the period, both the ishments of Hell and the infinite delights of Par-
images which the external world left imprinted on adise, to remember one’s sins in order to be able to
the mind and those that were created by means of confess them and be absolved, to remember at least
the imagination and the techniques of memory a handful of prayers and the basic tenets of the

--- Page 221 ---
Wy MNEMONICS
faith, were all decisive in determining one’s eternal the pneuma, the spiritus phantasticus. According
salvation or damnation. to this formula, in man there was a spiritus which
As it was for the classical orator, the art of mem- was responsible for the creation of the images or
ory became an indispensable tool for the Christian phantasmata; this spiritus constituted the raw
preacher. Given the fact that the preacher would material of dreams, prophecies, enchantments and
continue for several centuries to address a public love. The cosmos was animated by this same prin-
that was in large part illiterate, the importance not ciple, which acted as the intermediary between
only of remembering what he wished to say, but base matter and the soul of the universe, just as
also of impressing it upon the minds of his listeners in man it permitted the soul to communicate with
so that they would remember it, becomes evident. the body and the reason with the sentiments. In
mnemonic practices influenced by Neoplatonism
3. MEMORY AND THE SEARCH FOR the construction of images meant the mastery of
UNIVERSAL KNOWLEDGE procedures based upon the secret order of the
Between the 15th and 16th centuries the art of universe. Unlimited possibilities thus opened up
memory became the target of criticism and satire before the philosopher who learned to place him-
by humanists such as Erasmus, Melanchthon, > self in syntony with the profound order of the cos-
Agrippa and Rabelais. The masters of memory mos; he had access to universal knowledge and
were derided for the useless exercises that they could approach God in his omnipotence because to
inflicted upon their disciples, the “by rote” nature know, to remember and to be able to operate upon
of their techniques, and their absurd claims regard- things represented different facets of the same men-
ing the rapidity with which vast stores of knowl- tal process.
edge based upon words rather than substance The classical theory attributed to Simonides, the
could be imparted. The diffusion of the printed inventor of the art of memory, of ut pictura poesis
book further contributed to diminish the impor- or the similitude between painting and poetry
tance of the ability to remember; the book, the dic- found expression in an extraordinary variety of
tionary and the catalogue seemed to furnish the ways during the course of the 16th century — in
reader with all of the tools he needed to broaden his emblems, devices, mottos, rebuses and figured
learning and, should he wish, to create new works. poems where linguistic and pictorial expression
Nevertheless, it was against this background of came together in an ingenious interchange. The
criticism and radical change that the art of memory hieroglyphs of ancient Egypt exerted a particular
experienced not merely a renaissance, but its fascination; the mysterious symbols were consid-
period of greatest splendour. The explanation for ered to be a repository of antique knowledge writ-
this paradoxical situation lies in the felicitous meet- ten in a language approaching that of the gods,
ing of the art of memory with the principal ele- which could be deciphered only by a select few. In
ments of the culture of the period, from the 1422 the Florentine traveller Cristoforo Buondel-
extraordinary flowering of the arts and letters to a monti brought back with him from the Greek
revived interest in > hermetism, > Neoplatonism, island of Andros a manuscript allegedly written by
and Llullism to > magic, > astrology and kabbal- an Egyptian priest, Horapollus, which claimed to
ism [> Jewish Influences]. The workings of the explain the secrets of the hieroglyphs. The popu-
human mind, in particular its capacity to formulate larity of this work spread rapidly, especially after
mental pictures, were no longer interpreted as a the humanist Pierio Valeriano (pseudonym of
sign of weakness but rather as proof of its creative Giovan Pietro delle Fosse) published an edition in
capabilities and therefore of its divine nature. The 58 books with an extensive commentary entitled
Aristotelean notion of the imagination as a media- Hieroglyphica, which was published in Basel in
tor between the soul and the body, between feelings 1556. This obsession with the secret language
and the intellect, thus acquired new significance. of ancient Egypt was destined to endure, and
In this period the imagination also became a inspired — among other things — the search for a
point of contact between man and the cosmos, universal language made up entirely of images.
between the particular and the universal. For The art of memory borrowed liberally from con-
example, - Marsilio Ficino (1433-1499) bor- temporary emblems, devices, hieroglyphics, images
rowed a traditional syncretic process with roots in of classical gods and heroes, and from iconolog-
the distant past and re-worked it into a new and ical tradition in order to create striking imagines
enormously successful formula, in which the Aris- agentes. Indeed a process of mutual borrowing was
totelean concept of the imagination was combined initiated in which it is not always easy to establish
with the Neoplatonic and hermetic traditions of the original source of an image and the exact

--- Page 222 ---
MNEMONICS 798
sequence of its successive applications. For exam- the Godhead contained in the Kabbala, and to the
ple, the immense catalogue Iconologia published first principles established by Pythagorean and
by Cesare Ripa in 1593 was a favourite source of hermetic tradition. The philosopher who mastered
images among practitioners of the art of memory the entire structure of the theatre, according to
(as was Valeriano’s Hieroglyphica). For his cata- Camillo, could transform his mind into a universal
logue, however, Ripa drew not only upon the vast intellect capable of working upon and manipulat-
repertoires of images used by poets and artists, but ing words (through the art of eloquence), things
also from the tradition of the art of memory. In fact (through the science of + alchemy) and also him-
the authors of mnemonic treatises facing the chal- self, thus recovering all of the divine elements con-
lenge of vesting abstract concepts with concrete tained in his nature.
form often included an iconographic glossary ante The dream which inspired the theatre of
litteram for the convenience of their readers. Camillo — his attempt to contain the whole of real-
A typical exponent of the Renaissance revival of ity within a structure based upon combinations of
the art of memory was the philosopher > Giulio a fixed number of elements — was shared by most of
Camillo. The memory system which he describes in the memory systems that were developed during
his work Idea del teatro, published posthumously the 16th and 17th centuries in the principal intel-
in 1550, is both profoundly traditional and highly lectual centres of Europe. A key role was played in
innovative. In conformity with classical ideals the these systems by the revival, at the beginning of the
author promises to provide his readers with all 16th century, of the works of the great Catalan
the words and rhetorical devices needed to imitate mystic ~ Ramon Llull (ca. 1235-1316); both his
the great authors of the past, from Cicero to Virgil, actual writings and those attributed to him were re-
and from Petrarch to Boccaccio. Camillo’s theatre printed in new editions by the most prestigious
encompassed not only the memoria verborum (the publishing houses of Paris, Lyon and Cologne.
memory of words), but also the memoria rerum Llullism was fascinating to 16th century philoso-
(the memory of things). He claimed that his tech- phers because it appeared to offer a clavis univer-
niques could be used to imprint upon the mind a salis (universal key) to reality. According to Llull,
body of universal knowledge embracing all the arts once philosophy had identified the first principles
and sciences. of the universe, these could be codified very simply
In his works Camillo explained the basic presup- using letters of the alphabet inserted into a combi-
positions which underlay the working of his mem- natory system made up of concentric wheels which,
ory system: first, the existence of a unitary cosmos as they turned, would produce all of the possible
in which the different levels of reality corresponded associations in the universe. In this way one would
with one another and therefore words and things have before one’s eyes — and could thus control and
could be assumed to faithfully mirror one another; reproduce — the logic underlying all reality.
and secondly the premise that it was possible to These first principles could be found at every
construct a memory system whose loci and imag- level of being; in God they are transcendent attrib-
ines were not arbitrary but real — that is, capable of utes; in the natural world they become relative
reproducing the first principles, the hidden struc- principles; at the level of consciousness these
tures which constituted the foundations of reality. principles in various combinations constitute the
It was precisely for these reasons, he assures us, various systems of knowledge, which could be rep-
that the order, places and images which governed resented through the trees of science. The system of
his theatre were so magically effective; they repre- concentric wheels, the trees of knowledge, the let-
sented the secret nexus between all things, captur- ters of the alphabet, all assumed in Lullian thought
ing that which linked the divine world with the the same function as the imagines agentes in the art
heavenly world and the heavenly world with the of memory because they had the same purpose.
terrestrial world. Llullian philosophers believed that in this way it
The theatre contained within itself many differ- was possible both to store memories and to gener-
ent meanings, some of which were comprehensible ate new knowledge, because they were convinced
only to a few initiates. Camillo describes an impos- that the first principles of being were identical with
ing structure, probably inspired by the amphithe- the principles of knowledge and of remembering.
atres of ancient Rome, supported by seven columns Intellectuals were intrigued by many other as-
which on the most obvious level correspond with pects of Llull’s universal key. For example, they
the seven planets and their associated divinities, were fascinated by its intermingling of the meta-
while on a deeper level they refer the reader back to physical with the artificial-mechanical. Since it was
the seven days of Creation, to the secret names of based on divine principles, the wheels constituted a

--- Page 223 ---
WE, MNEMONICS
guide to meditation and spiritual elevation. At the classical nexus between the art of memory and the
same time, however, they permitted the user to set poetic and figurative arts. The compositio imagi-
in motion, like the interlocking parts of a watch, all num was in fact for him a philosophical exercise
the components of his knowledge. This mechanism that united the activities of the philosopher with
could then, like a machine, “generate” or lead to those of the master of memory in a creative effort
the acquisition of a universal knowledge. similar to that of the poet or the painter.
In addition, philosophers were greatly attracted The art of memory also played an important role
by the nexus that Llull established between this in the 16th and 17th century utopian tradition. In
new, universal method of acquiring knowledge and his masterpiece Citta del Sole, written in 1602, the
the ideal of universal peace. According to Llull, the philosopher, poet, and visionary > Tommaso Cam-
very fact that his art worked, demonstrated the panella describes a city whose layout mirrored the
truth of its principles, and it was these same princi- order of the cosmos. The City of the Sun is sur-
ples which formed the basis of the different systems rounded by seven circular walls and access may be
of philosophy and religion. His art could therefore gained by four gates corresponding to the four car-
perform an ecumenical function by converting all dinal points. The citizens of the city are governed
men to the true faith and eventually leading them by a priest-prince whom Campanella referred to as
to universal peace. One may readily understand Sole (Sun) or Metafisico (Metaphysician), assisted
why the teachings of Llull were so popular in intel- by three other priest-princes corresponding to the
lectual circles during the 16th and 17th centuries; three principal elements of metaphysics — Sapienza,
in a period lacerated by war and divided by politi- Potenza and Amore (Knowledge, Power, and
cal, religious and social conflict, the search for an Love). The children of the city would learn in part
encyclopaedic art of memory could be linked to the while playing and in part by observing the images
ideals of universal peace and a profound moral and that were painted in orderly succession along
intellectual renewal. the walls of the city and which illustrated all the
Among the authors who were influenced by Llull branches of knowledge. The constellations were
was the philosopher > Giordano Bruno. The tragic instead painted on the walls of the circular temple
end of this highly original thinker, who was burned that stood atop a hill in the very centre of the city.
at the stake as a heretic by the Roman Inquisition, Thus Campanella united the art of memory with
and his lengthy involvement with the themes of the latest pedagogic theories and the revived tradi-
memory, can be taken as symbolic of the serious- tions of astrology, magic and metaphysics to show
ness and complexity of the questions connected how right knowledge could ensure a more just and
with memory. In his work De umbris idearum happy civic life.
Bruno adopted a device similar to Llull’s concentric The influence of Citta del Sole can be seen in the
wheels to generate all the possible words and to work Orbis sensualis pictus (1658), an immensely
restore the occult powers of the magical and astro- popular textbook written by the Czech religious
logical images of the decans (vestiges of ancient leader and educational reformer Jan Amos Komen-
Oriental rites). The art of memory therefore was sky (+ Comenius). In it Komensky describes a sys-
directly linked to metaphysics, and through its tem of images which would permit the reader to
practice the user’s knowledge, memory and powers make his way to a universal land located beyond
of mind could be developed and enhanced. As the plurality of languages, and at the same time to
Bruno pointed out, however, the procedures for ascend from the orbis sensualis to the orbis intel-
constructing and using images were anything but lectualis, or to a unitary vision of reality.
arbitrary as they involved one in a continual search During the 16th and 17th centuries, therefore, in
for the shadows which eternal ideas have left upon its quest for universal knowledge the art of memory
the world, the traces which the metaphysical prin- bound itself inextricably with the arts of magic,
ciple of Unity has left impressed upon the plurality physiognomy, chiromancy, and the occult. Its prac-
of visible and imperfect things. The exercise of the titioners explored the secret network of analogies,
art of memory signified in the end a magical, almost signs and > correspondences which they believed
divine capacity to impose order upon things and linked the different levels of reality. The Aristote-
apprehend the ways in which things could be lean laws of association once used for the con-
changed or conserved. The masters of the art of struction of images were replaced by associations
memory could detect the eternal forms that lay based on these hidden relationships, which con-
within and beyond the chaotic and multiform real- ferred a magical dimension and function on the
ity of the material world. In this context Giordano process of remembrance. In the works of the
Bruno reinterpreted in contemporary terms the French masters Pierre Morestel, Lazare Meyssonier

--- Page 224 ---
MNEMONICS 800
and Jean Belot, for example, the art of memory versity Press, 20017; It. orig. 1995 # idem, La rete delle
formed part of a magical and Kabbalistic vision of immagini: Predicazione volgare dalle origini a Bernar-
dino da Siena, Torino: Einaudi, 2002 ¢ eadem, The
the world and included various divinatory prac-
Web of Images: Vernacular Preaching from its Origins
tices [> Divinatory Arts].
to St. Bernardino da Siena, London: Ashgate, 2003 ¢
The Jesuit scholar > Athanasius Kircher adopted Lina Bolzoni, Vittorio Erlindo & Marcello Morelli
Llull’s ars combinatoria in a complex philosophical (eds.), Memoria e memorie, Firenze: Olschki, 1998 ¢
construct in which the metaphysics of correspon- Mary Carruthers, The Book of Memory: A Study of
dence were joined to a free experimentation with Memory in Medieval Culture, Cambridge: Cambridge
various ingenious mechanisms. The mental proce- University Press, 1990 ¢ eadem, The Craft of Thought:
Meditation, Rhetoric, and the Making of Images, 400-
dures which Kircher describes, the new “alpha-
1200, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998
bets” which he devised, and the complicated
Pietro Corsi (ed.), The Enchanted Loom: Chapters in
diagrams and splendid illustrations which accom- the History of Neuroscience, Oxford: Oxford Uni-
panied his texts were intended to reflect — and ren- versity Press, 1991 # Helga Hajdu, Das mnemo-
der visible — the divine order that governed all technnische Schrifttum des Mittelalters (1936), repr.
reality. Amsterdam: Bonset, 1967 # Eric A. Havelock, Preface
Some decades earlier, between 1621 and 1627, to Plato, Harvard (Mass.): Harvard University Press,
1963 Barbara Keller Dall’Asta, Heilsplan und
the voluminous works of the English philosopher
Gedachtnis: Zur Mnemologie des 16. Jahrhunderts
— Robert Fludd appeared in Germany. A learned in Italien, Heidelberg: Universitatsverlag C. Winter,
apologist for the Rosicrucians, he was profoundly 2001 ¢ Paolo Rossi, Logic and the Art of Memory: The
influenced by hermetism, neoplatonism and the Quest for a Universal Language (It. orig. 1960),
revival of the Kabbala. The art of memory found its Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2000 # Jean
place among the arts of divination in one of the Paul Vernant, Mythe et pensée chez les Grecs: Etude de
psychologie historique, Paris: Maspero, 1965 ¢ Lud-volumes in which he describes the myriad and mys-
wig Volkmann, “Ars memorativa”, Jahrbuch der
terious correspondences which link the microcosm
Kunsthistorischen Sammlungen in Wien 3 (1929), 11-
with the macrocosm, and man with the universe. 203 ¢ Frances A. Yates, The Art of Memory, London:
Thus, from the 16th to the 17th century, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1966.
the art of memory celebrates its triumphs and at
the same time suffers its crisis. Its encyclopaedic LINA BOLZONI
dreams, linked to a unified conception of the world
and knowledge, go to pieces when old myths fall, Monoimus, znd cent.
the relations between words and things become
once again problematic, and the various arts and Monoimus was a Gnostic teacher [> Gnosti-
sciences develop, separate, and become specialized. cism] of whose life and career nothing is known.
Furthermore, it is during the same period that the Hippolytus (ca. 230), who has left us a summary of
late 16th century Wunderkammer (a collection that his teachings, including a fragment of one of his let-
in itself combines, almost as if constituting a mirror ters (Refutatio, VIII, 12-15; X, 17, §) calls him ‘the
of the cosmos, the naturalia, the mirabilia and the Arab’, which means that he came from the Roman
artificialia, the products of man and his fantasies, province of Arabia.
along with those of nature) is replaced by the pic- According to Monoimus, there is a twofold prin-
ture gallery, the collection of antiquities, and the ciple of the All, Man and the Son of Man, of whom
museum of the various natural sciences. The theatre the former is unborn and immortal and the latter
of the world is shattered in stages: the theatre of born, albeit independently of time, will or plan. For
memory can no longer reunify and represent it. just as a fire and the light it produces are insepara-
ble, so Man is unthinkable without the Son of Man.
Lit.: Jorg Berns & Wolfgang Neuber (eds.), Ars memo-
In order to elucidate the essential characteristics of
rativa: Zur kulturgeschichtlichen Bedeutung der Ge-
dachtniskunst 1400-1750, Tiibingen: Max Niemeyer, his first principles, Monoimus made use of Greek
1993 @ Jorg Berns & Wolfgang Neuber (eds.), Seelen- Pythagorean arithmetical speculations [-> Number
Maschinen: Gattungstraditionen, Funktionen und Symbolism]. Man and the Son of Man are perfect
Leistungsgrenzen der Mnemotechniken vom spdten and their perfection is best illustrated by the image
Mittelalter bis zum Beginn der Moderne, Wien: of the letter ota (I), the perfect number, both in its
Bohlau, 2000 Herwig Blum, Die antike Mnemo-
Roman and its Greek interpretation. The unity of
technik, New York, Hildesheim: Olms, 1969 ¢ Lina
the All is expressed by the Roman letter I (= 1, Bolzoni & Pietro Corsi (eds.), La cultura della memo-
ria, Bologna: Il Mulino, 1992 Lina Bolzoni, The interpreted as the Monad), the plurality of the All
Gallery of Memory: Literary and Iconographic Models by the Greek letter I (= 10, interpreted as the
in the Age of the Printing Press, Toronto: Toronto Uni- Decad). The Son of Man is the ultimate source of

--- Page 225 ---
801 MORE
creation, since he possesses everything that is also 2:9 (VIII, 13, 2). But we do not know whether or
in his Father. However, only a part of him is actu- not Jesus played a role in Monoimus’s doctrine of
ally involved in the creation of the cosmos: ‘The salvation, if he really had one. That Hippolytus’
very dim beams coming down to this world from report does not say anything about it, might be an
the Son maintain and strengthen the change of mat- indication that his source provided him only witha
ter, i.e the transformation’ (VIII, 13, 3). Though part of Monoimus’s system. However, it seems also
Monoimus apparently did not have a positive view possible that he adhered to a hermetic world-view,
of the material world and the human condition, it which he expressed in a Christian and more specific
remains unclear whether or not he ascribed the Gnostic terminology.
actual creation to a lower, imperfect Demiurge. It is
very unlikely, however, that, as has been suggested M. Marcovich (ed.), Hippolytus: Refutatio omnium
(Marcovich, 139-140), Monoimus thought of the haeresium (PTS, 25), Berlin & New York: De Gruyter,
imperfect and malevolent Jewish Creator when he 1986, 330-335; Engl. trans. (after the German trans.
by W. Foerster) in: W. Foerster (ed.), Gnosis: A Selec-
said that God ‘takes pleasure in the transformation
tion of Gnostic Texts, Engl. trans. edited by R. McL.
of the created world’ (VIII, 14, 8). Wilson, vol. 1: Patristic Evidence, Oxford: Clarendon
In his letter, to a certain Theophrastus, Monoimus Press, 1972, 247-250.
argued that to find God, i.e. the Son of Man, and at
the same time one’s own self, one has only to look Lit.: M. Marcovich, “Monoimus’ Letter to Theophras-
at oneself. It is worthwhile to quote the fragment in tus”, in: idem, Studies in Graeco-Roman Religions and
full: ‘If you want to learn to know the All stop Gnosticism (Studies in Greek and Roman Religions, 4),
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1988, 134-143.
searching for God in the creation and similar
things: search for him starting from yourself. And
learn who is this who had appropriated to himself ROELOF VAN DEN BROEK
absolutely everything in yourself, as somebody dif-
ferent from you, by saying my mind, my reason, my More, Henry,* October 1614 Grantham,
soul, my body. And learn what is the cause of your t 1687 Cambridge
feeling grief or joy, love or hatred; and what is the
cause of your being awake against your wish or More was born in Grantham, Lincolnshire, the
feeling sleepy against your wish; of your being son of Alexander More, Alderman and Mayor
angry against your wish or feeling affection against (1617) of Grantham, and his wife Anne (née Lacy).
your wish. And if you accurately examine all these He was educated at Grantham Grammar School
things you will find him (God) in yourself, the Per- and Eton College. In 1631 he entered Christ’s Col-
fect One coming from the Perfect One, considering lege, in the University of Cambridge, where Robert
everything as his own — both the so-called non-exis- Gell was his tutor. He graduated BA in 1636 and
tent things and the existent ones — and being one MA 1639 and was elected fellow of Christ’s Col-
and many, just as is that “One Stroke” (Iota). And lege in place of Gell in 1641. In the same year he
you will find the explanation from yourself’ (com- was ordained, and his uncle, Gabriel More, pre-
bination of VIII, 15, 1-2 and X, 17, 5; transl. Mar- sented him with the advowson of Ingoldsby near
covich, 141). We do not know the context of this Grantham. He remained a fellow of Christ’s Col-
fragment, but Monoimus apparently taught that lege for the rest of his life, declining preferment. He
everything participates in the divine being, and died in 1687.
that, therefore, you only have to look at yourself if More was, together with > Ralph Cudworth,
you want to know God, the All and yourself. These one of the most important of the group of philo-
ideas are more Hermetic [> Hermetism] than typi- sophical divines known now as the Cambridge Pla-
cally Gnostic. As a close parallel may only be men- tonists. His tolerant religious convictions were
tioned here Hermetic Definitions IX, 4: ‘Whoever formed in reaction against the strict Calvinism of
knows himself knows everything. Everything is his upbringing and the religious strife of the Civil
within man’. That raises the question of whether War period. As well as being considered a founder
Monoimus was a Gnostic at all. That he called his of the Latitudinarian movement, he came to be
divine principles Man and the Son of Man points regarded as one of the leading English philosophers
undoubtedly to Gnostic influences. He quotes from of his time. He was certainly the most prolific and
the Old and the New Testament and seems to have widely read of the Cambridge Platonists in the 17th
been aware of the generally Christian identification century.
of the Iota with Jesus, as can be concluded from his More’s first published writings were long philo-
quotation of a combination of Colossians 1:19 and sophical poems of Platonist stamp: Psychodia

--- Page 226 ---
MORE 802
Platonica or a Platonick Song of the Soul (1642) ume of the Kabbala denudata (1679) edited by
was republished with the further poems in the col- Knorr.
lection Philosophical Poems (1647). There fol- More’s wide-ranging interests in prophecy, kab-
lowed, from 1650-1651, a public controversy with balah and witchcraft, on the one hand, as well as
the alchemist ~ Thomas Vaughan, who wrote theology, philosophy and science, on the other,
under the name of Eugenius Philalethes and whom mean that he cannot be easily classified in modern
More attacked under the pseudonym Alazonmas- terms. Neither he, nor his contemporaries for that
tix Philalethes. Thereafter More eschewed polemic, matter, regarded these interests as mutually incom-
preferring to elaborate a measured, philosophical patible. More’s debt to what are now regarded as
defence of his position. His Enthusiasmus tri- esoteric writers and writings must be understood in
umphatus (1656) insists on the importance of rea- the context of his Renaissance syncretism which
son as an antidote to what he regarded mistaken viewed religious and philosophical truth as belong-
beliefs. There followed two important works of ing to a tradition of ancient wisdom. This prisca
apologetics: An Antidote against Atheisme (1653) sapientia or philosophia perennis [> Tradition]
and The Immortality of the Soul (1659), in which supposedly derived from Moses, and was imparted
he developed his philosophical defence of religious via a succession ofthinkers both ancient (e.g. Plato)
belief against perceived atheist philosophers such and modern (notably Descartes). This understand-
as Thomas Hobbes. The basic premise of this argu- ing of human wisdom was bolstered, in More’s
ments is that the existence of spirits is logically con- case, by his penchant for symbolic readings, by
nected to the existence of God, or as he formulates which he sought to unlock the rational content of
it in An Antidote, ‘That saying is no less true in occulted truth, whether in prophetic visions or >
Politicks, No Bishop No King than this in meta- number symbolism. This is best illustrated in
physics, No spirit no God’ (Antidote, 3.16.17). To More’s Conjectura Cabbalistica of 1655, which ex-
this end he adduced supernatural phenomena, pounds the first book of Genesis as a species of
firmly convinced that the appearance of ghosts and Neopythagoreanism that prefigures aspects of
instances of > witchcraft constituted evidence of contemporary philosophy, notably Cartesianism
the operation of spirits. In the same cause he edited (though he subsequently revised his enthusiasm for
Joseph Glanvill’s, Sadducismus triumphatus 1681, Cartesianism, out of fears that it might encourage
a work which consists largely in a compilation of atheism). More achieves his interpretation of
such evidence. His most extensive elaboration of Genesis by way of Plotinus and Philo, among
his philosophy of spirit comes in his Enchiridion others. He attributed his interest in Platonism to his
metaphysicum (1671) where he seeks to explain extensive reading of among ‘the Platonick writers,
natural and supernatural phenomena by the oper- Marsilius Ficinus, Plotinus himself, Mercurius Tris-
ations of what he calls his ‘hylarchic principle’ or megistus; and the Mystical Divines’ (Ward, Life,
Spirit of Nature. 18) when still a young man. Among these he men-
The Apology of Henry More (1664), is a brief tions his special affection for ‘that little golden
but important statement of More’s understanding book’, Theologia germanica attributed to Johann
of the role of reason in matters of religion. How- Tauler. He claimed that it was reading these
ever, his most important theological work is his authors which helped to rescue him from a scepti-
An Explanation of the Grand Mystery of Godli- cal crisis which engulfed him after he graduated.
ness (1660), which sets out his broadly tolerant And he continued to cite > Hermes Trismegistus as
theology as well as his revival of heterodox beliefs, an authority, even after Casaubon had demon-
such as the Origenist doctrine of the pre-existence strated that Hermetic writings were not as ancient
of the soul. In later life, he devoted considerable as previously supposed. More took care to set a dis-
time to the study of biblical prophecy. Books such tance between his own philosophical Platonism
as Paralipomena prophetica (1685) and Apocalyp- and what he regarded as the confused and self-
sis apocalpseos (1680) develop the exegetical theo- deluding claims of esotericists like Vaughan, >
ries of his mentor, Joseph Mede. He also studied the Paracelsus and > Jacob Boehme. His An Explana-
Jewish kabbalah [> Jewish Influences], persuaded tion of the Grand Mystery of Godliness includes an
that the secret traditions of the Jews preserved in attack on ~> astrology, later republished as Tetrac-
symbolic form nuggets of true philosophy. He tys Anti-Astrologica (1681). He was also deeply
was put in contact with the German kabbalistic interested in the scientific developments of his day
scholar, > Christian Knorr von Rosenroth, by their and was a fellow of the Royal Society. However, his
mutual friend > Francis Mercury van Helmont. As own overzealous appropriation of the work of
a consequence, More contributed to the first vol- Robert Boyle to support his own theories resulted

--- Page 227 ---
803 MORLEY
in censure by Boyle. Controversies such as this Press, 1982 ¢ Rupert Hall, Henry More: Magic Reli-
notwithstanding, More’s writings were widely read gion and Experiment, Oxford: Blackwell, 1990 @ Serge
in his own day. He summarised his philosophical Hutin, Henry More, Hildesheim: G. Olms, 1966 ¢
Sarah Hutton (ed.), Henry More, 1614-1687: Tercen-
and religious views for the benefit of more general
tenary Studies, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Pub-
readers in his popular Divine Dialogues (1668)
lishers, 1990 ¢ idem, “More, Newton and the
published under the pseudonym Franciscus Evistor Language of Biblical Prophecy”, in: J.E. Force and R.B.
Palaeopolitanus. The collected edition of his writ- Popkin, The Books of Nature and Scripture, Dordrecht:
ings, a Collection of Several Philosophical Writings Kluwer, 1994, 39-54 ¢ Samuel Mintz, The Hunting of
(1662), and the translation of his works into Latin Leviathan: Seventeenth-century Reactions to the Mate-
rialism and Moral Philosophy of Thomas Hobbes,(Opera omnia, 1671-1679) ensured him a wide
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962 # Mar-
audience among the learned, both at home and
jorie Nicolson, “Christ’s College and the Latitude-
overseas. Men”, Modern Philology 27 (1929), 35-53 ¢ Richard
Ward, The Life of the Learned and Pious Dr. Henry
Philosophical Poems, Cambridge, 1647 # [Alazonmas- More, Parts x and 2 (S. Hutton, R. Crocker, R. Hall,
tix Philalethes], Observations upon Anthroposophia eds.), Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000.
Theomagica, [London], 1650 @ [Alazonmastix Phi-
lalethes], The Second Lash of Alazonmastix, London, SARAH HUTTON
1651 ¢ An Antidote against Atheisme: or, and Appeale
to the Natural Faculties of the Minde of Man, whether
there be not a God, London, 1653 ¢ Conjectura Cab- Morley, Daniel of, * ca. 1140 Norfolk,
balistica: or, a Conjectural Essay of Interpreting the t ca. 1210 place of death unknown
Minde of Moses According to a Threefold Cabbala,
viz., Literal, Philosophical, Mystical, London, 1653 ¢ Living one generation after the masters of
Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, or a Discourse on the Chartres and Tours, Daniel demonstrated an inter-
Nature, Causes, Kinds and Cure of Enthusiasm, Lon-
est similar to theirs in naturalistic Platonism.
don and Cambridge, 1656 # The Immortality of the
Soul, so farre forth as it is Demonstrable from the Unfortunately, regarding scientific subjects the
Knowledge of Nature and the Light of Reason, Lon- Latin philosophers of his time offered him neither
don and Cambridge, 1659 # An Explanation of the clarity nor certainty. Paris was mainly interested
Grand Mystery of Godliness; or, a True and Faithful in Law and Theology. Daniel therefore went to
Representation of the Everlasting Gospel of our Lord Toledo to study the “teachings of the Arabs” (doc-
and Saviour Jesus Christ, London, 1660 ¢ A Collection
trina arabum) and joined the circle of translators
of Several Philosophical Writings, London, 1662 ¢
gathered around Gerard of Cremona. Deriving
Apology of Henry More, in: A Modest Enquiry, Lon-
don, 1664 Enchiridion Ethicum, Praecipua Moralis strength from his new knowledge, he composed the
Philosophiae Rudimenta Complectens, London and tract Liber de naturis inferiorum et superiorum
Cambridge, 1667 ¢ Divine Dialogues Containing (1187) in England.
Sundry Disquisitions and Instructions Concerning the Daniel drew much inspiration from the Bible and
Attributes of God in the World, London, 1668 ¢ An ~ Augustine. He read Plato, whose disciple he con-
Exposition ofthe Seven Epistle to the Seven Churches,
sidered himself, through Calcidius, but did not
London, 1669 Enchiridion metaphysicum; sive, de
hesitate to criticize the latter’s astronomical theo- rebus incorporeia succincta & luculenta dissertatio,
London, 1671 # H. Mori Cantabrigiensis opera omnia, ries. Despite his claims to the contrary, Daniel
3 vols, 1675-1679 # Apocalypse apocalpseos or the was indebted to the Latins: Adelard of Bath, his
Revelation of St John the Divine Unveiled, London, compatriot, whose example he followed in tak-
1680 @ Tetractys Anti-Astrologica, London, 1681 ¢ ing recourse to Arabian science; Guillaume de
Paralipomena Prophetica: Containing Several Supple- Conches, annotator of the Timaeus and philoso-
ments and Defenses of Dr. Henry More his Expositions
pher of nature; Thierry of Chartres, who wrote.a
of the Prophet Daniel and the Apocalypse, London,
commentary on Genesis but renounced the tradi- 1685 ¢ The Conway Letters, edited by M.H. Nicolson,
revised by S. Hutton, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992 ¢ tional form of the hexaemeron inherited from the
Joseph Glanvill, Sadducismus triumphatus: or, A Full Fathers; > Bernard Silvester, whose Cosmography,
and Plain Evidence Concerning Witches and Appari- nourished by these authors, was permeated with
tions, edited with additions by H.M., London, 168 tr. hermetism [> Hermetic Literature]. Let us mention
finally the hermetic sources themselves, such as the
Lit.: Allison Coudert, “A Cambridge Platonist’s Kab- Liber Triplicis Mundi.
balist Nightmare”, Journal of the History of Ideas 36
Astronomy, which Daniel did not distinguish
(1975), 633-652 ¢ Alan Gabbey, “Philosophia carte-
from ~> astrology, was for him a major science. ‘He siana triumphata: Henry More, 1646-71”, in: T.M.
Lennon et al. (eds.), Problems in Cartesianism, who condemns astronomy’, he said, ‘necessarily
Kingston and Montreal: Queens McGill University destroys physics’. He argued that if we are ignorant

--- Page 228 ---
MORLEY 804
of the universe and its laws, we cannot know assigned to each of them the cult of its own special
humanity and its destiny; we recognize here the god — among these gods there were also cats, dogs
hermetic theme of the relation between macrocosm and ibises —, allotted land to their priests and even
and microcosm. Basing himself on the masters of taught them the art of writing. All this he did to
Arabian astronomy, Daniel discussed the astrologi- preserve the monarchy for his stepfather, pharaoh
cal virtues of the sun. He asserted, moreover, that Chenephres (= most probably Sebekhotep or
the heavens had not been formed from a corrupt- -Kha‘nefer-Re‘, ca. 1730-ca. 1722), and to prevent
ible substance but from a fifth element, the quin- civil war. The ordinary people loved him for all this
tessence. On this point he refuted the objections and the priests even deemed him worthy of divine
made notably by Guillaume de Conches with honour, calling him “Hermes” because of his inter-
regard to the stars, which, not being composed of pretation (herméneia) of the hieroglyphs. His step-
the four elements, could not have their qualities. father, however, became jealous and sent him on a
Daniel’s terminological innovations, influenced campaign against Ethiopia, hoping that he would
by hermetism, can make his ideas appear more be killed in battle, for his army consisted of a hun-
revolutionary than they are. In reality his work re- dred thousand untrained farmers. In order to have
conciled very diverse currents: Pythagoreanism, > shelter, these men founded the town of Hermupolis
Aristotelianism, Platonism, hermetism and Ara- and declared the ibis to be its sacred bird, because
bian astronomy. In this respect, he is very represen- it kills all kind of vermin harmful to mankind. The
tative of the new philosophical tendencies that end of the campaign and the subsequent events
played a transitional role between the golden age of are less important in this connection, but as a result
medieval Platonism and the triumph of the Aris- of it the Ethiopians adopted the ritual of circumci-
totelianism that would supplant it. sion from Moysos, and so did all the (Egyptian)
priests.
Liber de naturis inferiorum et superiorum (K. Sudhoff, Though Flavius Josephus does not mention the
ed.), Archiv fiir die Geschichte der Naturwissen-
identification of Moses and Hermes, he does seem
schaften und der Technik 8 (1917), 6-40 Correction
to have known Artapanus’ story, for he offers a by A. Birkenmajer, idem 9 (1918), 45-51 @ Philosophia
(Gr. Maurach, ed.), Mittellateinisches Jahrbuch 14 missing link in it. He tells us how Moses on his way
(1979), 212-245. to conquer Ethiopia had to cross a region full of
snakes. These he overcame by letting loose from
Lit.: M. Miller, “Die Stellung des Daniel von Morley papyrus baskets numerous ibises, which attacked
in der Wissenschaft des Mittelalter”, Philosophisches these snakes and killed them. In the end he agreed
Jahrbuch 41 (1928), 301-307 ¢ Th. Silverstein,
to marry the Ethiopian princess Tharbis, on condi-
“Daniel of Morley, English Comogonist and Student of
Arabic Science”, Mediaeval Studies 19 (1948), 179- tion that she would surrender the capital Meroe to
196 ¢ H. Schipperges, “Einfliisse arabischer Medizin him (Antiquitates Judaicae Il, 238-253). This last
auf die Mikrokosmosliteratur des 12. Jh.”, Miscellanea detail is, of course, an elaboration on Numbers
Mediaevalia 1 (1962), 139-142. 12:1 (LXX) where it is stated that he had married
an “Ethiopian” woman.
MICHEL LEMOINE Although it seems strange that a Jew would
ascribe to no one less than Moses, who was against
Moses all idols, the institution of the Egyptian animal
cults, there can be little doubt that Artapanus him-
In the syncretistic religious climate of Ptolemaic self was Jewish, for his writing is clearly apologeti-
Alexandria Moses was identified with the Egyptian cal in the sense that it defends the cultural primacy
god Thot-Hermes [> Hermes Trismegistus]. The of the Jews. Not even his Persian name is an
only direct source for this equation is the third frag- argument against his Jewish nationality, for there
ment of a book On the Jews written by a certain are other instances of Jews bearing Persian names
Artapanus (ca. 100 B.C.E.), preserved in Eusebius, such as Dareios and Arsames, and the very name
Praeparatio Evangelica 1X, 27, 1-37. It tells us, “Artaphan” is found twice at the Jewish cemetery
mainly in 27, 1-10, that Moses or “Moysos”, as of Teuchira-Arsinoe in Cyrenaica (Supplementum
Artapanos calls him, invented all kinds of utensils Epigraphicum Graecum, 9, 613; 709). As Arta-
for the Egyptians, such as ships, instruments for panus must have preceded Alexander Polyhistor,
hoisting stones, weapons, and inundation and war who quoted him, he may be dated to about too
machines, and that he also introduced philosophy. B.C.E. (Walter, 123-125). At first sight, he seems to
He divided the country into 36 districts or nomes, have offered an example of Jewish Euhemerism:

--- Page 229 ---
805 MOSES
originally, the great god Hermes would have been him with Moses. The tendency to keep them apart
nothing else than a human being. On the other is much less marked in ancient and medieval magi-
hand, it is true that in Jewish circles, and likewise cal and alchemical literature [> Magic; >
in Alexandria, Moses was sometimes deified. Alchemy]. In the great Leiden Magical Papyrus
Ezekiel Poeta’s Exagoge (ca. 200 B.C.E.?) portrays (Papyri Graecae Magicae, XIII, 3; 22), the treatises
Moses as receiving from God His diadem, sceptre IV and X of the Corpus Hermeticum [> Hermetic
and throne, and Philo’s Life of Moses, I, 158 states Literature] are entitled respectively The Monad or
in so many words that Moses was called ‘God and Eighth Book of Moses and The Key of Moses. It is
King of the whole people’. In a way, therefore, the even said that Hermes stole from Moses’ Monad
equation of Moses and Hermes is comparable to the exposition of the seven things and materials
the well-known identification of two gods from dif- that can be burnt in magic and inserted this list in
ferent countries, such as Mars-Ares. his own holy book entitled The Wing (PGM XIII,
Most of the activities and inventions ascribed by 14). In the alchemical corpus, Kleidion (The Little
Artapanus to Moysos-Hermes can be paralleled Key) is likewise the title of a book attributed to
somehow by what the Old Testament tells of Hermes (Collection des Anciens Alchimistes Grecs,
Moses and what is known about Thot. As to the 2, 281/3, 271), and other works and words of Her-
technical inventions (except those of ships and mes (Trismegistus) are often quoted in the many
weapons): Moses supervised the construction of recipes. The name of Moses, too, is here of frequent
the Tabernacle (Exod. 39:3 2ff.), whereas Thot was occurrence. By the side of many other biblical
the architect and decorator of the Egyptian temples figures, such as notably king Solomon, Moses’
(Boylan, 89), and was generally, according to Plato, presence in the science of alchemy was especially
‘most skilful’ (technikotatos; Phaedrus, 274 E), as due to the fact that he had smashed the Golden Calf
well as the inventor (heuretés) of all technology of the apostatizing Israelites to gold dust and had
(Diodorus, Library, I, 43, 6). As for philosophy: mixed this dust with their drinking water (Exod.
Moses’ connection with law and law-giving needs 32:20), and further that he was the supervisor of
no illustration; for his wisdom and erudition, ref- Bezaleel, the skilled metal worker who built the
erence can be made to the tradition worded in Acts Tabernacle (Exod. 35:30-33). Moses’ so-called
7:22; Thot was the god of wisdom and law par aurum potabile (“drinkable gold”) played a role as
excellence (Boylan, 185; 188; 192; 195; 197f.). The late as the beginning of the 18th century, as a kind
division of Egypt into nomes has its counterpart, of of Elixir that could prolong life (Bachmann-
course, in the allotments of land in Transjordania Hofmeier, 56f.), whereas Bezaleel is mentioned by
and Canaan to the eleven tribes (Num 32:33ff.; name in the opening lines of the treatise Chemistry
34:13ff.); to the land of the Egyptian priests one of Moses, which paraphrase Exod. 35:30ff., but
may compare the towns assigned to the Levites make a priest of him (CAAG 2, 300-315/3, 287-
(Num. 35:1ff.); according to the Shabaka-stone 302). This treatise is also quoted elsewhere in the
line 59, Thot was the founder of the towns and dis- corpus: (CAAG <2) va Sots) 35syne Boks 338) 214
tricts, and also of the local cults (lines 59-60). That famous alchemical recipe attributed to Moses is
Moses would have established local cults seems that of the Diplosis (Multiplication), that is of gold,
strange in view of his reaction to the veneration of by alloying it, here three parts of gold with one part
the Golden Calf (Exod. 32), but on the other hand of copper, in the belief that the end product would
he made the brass serpent, to which the Israelites become four parts of gold (CAAG 2, 38f./3, 40).
had to look up (Num. 21:4ff.), and which was still, Moses’ former link with Hermes is here echoed by
or again, venerated under Hezekiah (2 Kings 18:4). the title of Triseumoiros, which the alchemist Pap-
The invention of writing: Moses is the first man pos the Philosopher assigns to him (CAAG 2, 28/3,
mentioned in the OT to have written (Ex 17:14); 30), the “Three Times Fortunate”; it certainly
Thot was the god of language, writing and inter- matches and continues that of Hermes “Trismegis-
pretation (Boylan, 182-194; Diodorus, Library, I, tos” or “Trisaristos”.
16, 2); for Moses as interpreter of the Law, cf.
Deut. 1:4. In addition to these parallels there are M. Berthelot & Ch.-E. Ruelle (eds.), Collection des
anciens alchimistes grecs, 3 vols., Paris, 1887-1888
some more which have no basis in the text of Arta-
(repr. Zeller: Osnabriick, 1967) ¢ G. Schroeder &
panus, but may well have supported the equation E. des Places (eds.), Eusébe de Césarée: La Préparation
of Moses and Thot-Hermes (Mussies, 108-118). Evangélique. Livres VIII-X (SC 369), Paris: Editions
Although several Christian authors referred to du Cerf, 1991 ¢ German trans. with extensive com-
Hermes in a positive sense, they never identified mentary: N. Walter, Fragmente jiidisch-hellenistischer

--- Page 230 ---
MOSES 806
Histortker, in: Jiidische Schriften aus hellenistisch- Geneva, which he directed until his death. The aim
romischer Zeit, 1, Giitersloh: Mohn, 1976, 121-136. of this Association was to contribute to the emer-
gence of the “New Man” during what he called the
Lit.: M. Bachmann & Th. Hofmeier, Geheimnisse der
“transitional period” (i.e., Modernity), a period he
Alchemie, Basel: Schwabe, 1999 ¢ P. Boylan, Thot the
considered fraught with perils for the future. From Hermes of Egypt: A Study of some Aspects of Theo-
logical Thought in Ancient Egypt, London-Oxford: 1962 on he devoted himself to the C.E.C.E., creat-
Milford-Oxford University Press, 1922 @ J.R. Harris ing many subsidiary branches in various countries,
(ed.), The Legacy of Egypt, Oxford, 2nd ed., 1971 ¢ and to the task of supplementing what he had
E. Meyer, Aegyptische Chronologie (Abhandlungen written in Gnosis. He titled these additions “Stro-
der Koniglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissen-
mates”, a term borrowed from ~ Clement of
schaften, Phil.-Hist. Klasse, I), Berlin: Reimer, 1904 ¢
Alexandria, under the motto “The Art to Over-
G. Mussies, “The Interpretatio Judaica of Thot-
Hermes”, in: M. Heerma van Voss et al. (eds.), Studies come”. They circulated among a number of his fol-
in Egyptian Religion Dedicated to Professor Jan lowers from 1966 until his death and thereafter
Zandee (Studies in the History of Religion [Supple- thanks to the initiatives of his widow. The C.E.C.E.
ments to Numen], 43), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1982, 89-120. disappeared around 1967. Mouravieff’s widow
deposited the C.E.C.E. archives at the University
GERARD MUSSIES Library of Geneva. Then she left for Montreal,
where she lived until her death in 1989 with their
Mouravieff, Boris, * 8.3.1890 Cronstadt son Boris Vsevolod Volkoff, who remained the only
(Russia), ¢ 28.9.1969 Geneva heir to the rights of Mouravieff’s works. The Boris
Mouravieff Association, whose main purpose is to
Early in his life, Mouravieff came under the contribute to the dissemination of Gndsis, was cre-
spiritual influence of his great uncle Andrei ated in Paris in 2000.
Mouravieff, the founder of an important orthodox By “esotericism” Mouravieff means the ways to
monastery at Mount Athos. He became an officer become ‘conscious of one’s real self’ (‘conscient de
in the Higher Military School in 1910 and in this son vrai Moi’) and develop this true self beyond the
capacity served in the Russian Imperial Navy dur- deceitful illusions of one’s ordinary “Personality”.
ing World War I. After the abdication of the tsar in This involves achieving a progressive psychic devel-
March 1917, he became part of the Cabinet of opment that is likely to give access to higher levels of
Minister Alexandre Kerensky until October 1918. “Consciousness”. Mankind is on the threshold of
From that time on he began to steep himself in the “Era of the Holy Spirit”, a position which is sup-
studies of archaeology and history. In 1920 he left posed to open up enormous possibilities for human
Russia for Constantinople, where he attended evolution. But if mankind fails to enter this new era,
some lectures given by > Piotr Demianovich Ous- it will be subjected to the deluge of fire mentioned by
pensky, who became his friend and introduced him the Apostle Peter (2nd Epistle, III, 10).
to > G.I. Gurdjieff. In 1924, Mouravieff arrived in The first volume of Gudsis opens with an intro-
France where he married a Russian, Larissa Bassof, ductory note dealing with Piotr Demianovich Ous-
and worked until 1941 as a consulting engineer for pensky, whose In Search of the Miraculous had
several oil companies, while simultaneously devot- been published in 1950. Mouravieff criticizes both
ing himself to study and writing. Arrested by the the title and the book. The title, because there is no
Gestapo at the beginning of 1944, he escaped such thing as an “Unknown Teaching” — there is no
thanks to the help of members of the French Resis- secrecy, no unknown spiritual legacy, since the lat-
tance. He and his family fled to Switzerland, where ter, he says, has always been accessible to ‘those
he made a living as a translator for industrial com- who were seriously interested in such matters’. He
panies. Having enrolled in 1945 as a student at the criticizes the book, because it is just a conglomer-
University of Geneva, he prepared a thesis on the ate of “fragments”, whereas a really comprehen-
history of the Russian-Turkish Alliance under the sive presentation of the “Tradition” would have
reign of Napoleon. He became Privatdozent at that been necessary — a presentation which he, Moura-
University in 1955, a position which he held until vieff, intends to offer his readers with the three
1963. In addition to teaching history (mostly of volumes of Gnédsis. For him, true “Tradition” is
Russia), he gave seminars on “esotericism”, which essentially Christian in character. Save for the idea
became the basis of his main work Gnosis, first of karma, which he occasionally endorses, he bor-
published in French in 1961-1965. rows very little from non-Christian eastern reli-
In 1961 Mouravieff founded the Centre d’Etudes gious. Besides, Mouravieff believes that true
Chrétiennes Esotériques (C.E.C.E.), based in “Tradition” has been transmitted over the cen-

--- Page 231 ---
807 MOURAVIEFF
turies since Jesus Christ through a never-inter- tual dimensions. As a historian he had ample mate-
rupted chain of members of the “Great Esoteric rial at his disposal (mostly related to Russia). On this
Brotherhood”, whose existence he believes has basis he elaborated propositions about international
been described by Paul in Romans (8:28-30). politics, laid out in Gnodsis and other publications
The referential corpus of Gndsis is comprised (see bibliography). More generally, he remained very
first and foremost of the Bible, some Church open to the scientific achievements of his century — in
Fathers, and Christian orthodox mystics or theolo- short, to Modernity. Contrary to the representatives
gians. Apart from these references, Mouravieff of the “Traditionalist School”, he did not anticipate
does not quote (even in the many footnotes) any doom but the positive progress of mankind. The
representative esoteric thinkers. In the long bibli- third volume of Gndsis contains long passages
ographies presented at the end of the first two devoted to sexual relationships, marriage, and fam-
volumes the names of many esoteric thinkers do ily, Although these latter reflections start from a
appear, such as > Jacob Boehme, > Antoine Fabre practical and concrete examination of society as he
d’Olivet, > René Guénon, > Frithjof Schuon, even knew it, he praises the ‘couple of the Knight and of
> C.G. Jung, and of course Ouspensky (George I. the Dame of his thoughts’ as the true model to be
Gurdjieff is conspicuous by his absence), but they imitated in order to achieve a genuine realization of
are not mentioned in the text itself. In fact, it seems what love should be all about.
far from certain that Mouravieff was instrumental The Christian esotericist Mouravieff did not
in the compilation of the bibliography, which is want to be typecast as a guru, and indeed he cer-
said to have been ‘prepared with the collaboration tainly was not one. He did not direct disciples like
of Dr. Albert-Jean Lucas’. Gurdjieff did, nor did he offer oracular pronounce-
Gnosis is not the work of a theosopher proper. It ments like Guénon. His teachings bear very little
lacks the visionary inspiration characteristic of resemblance to those of the ~ Theosophical Soci-
classic theosophical works. The practice of the so- ety. But his form of thought (not his “doctrine”)
called creative > imagination, which is so impor- displays some kinship with that of both > Rudolf
tant in the latter, plays a secondary role here. Steiner and Ouspensky, however different these
Mouravieff’s book is devoid of vivid images (no three thinkers otherwise were. Lastly, his disciples
descriptions of the Fall of angels, of Man, etc.) and are and have always been persons who work indi-
consists instead of abstract theological and mathe- vidually on the basis of Gndsis, which they use as
matical symbols. Indeed, Mouravieff’s work is lav- an initiatic working tool.
ishly illustrated with geometrical diagrams and
algebraic formulas aimed at laying out the inter- Le probleme de lautorité super-étatique, Neuchatel/
connections between the visible and invisible skele- Paris: La Baconniére, 1950 ¢ “Uhistoire a-t-elle un
sens?”, Revue Suisse d’Histoire [Zurich] 4 (1954) ¢tal structure (he says that “Tradition” calls it the
“Le probleme de |’Homme nouveau”, Synthéses |Brus-
“Great Octave”) of the cosmos on the one hand,
sels] (1956), 126-127 # “Ouspensky, Gurdjieff, et les
and the various levels — material, psychological, Fragments d’un Enseignement inconnu”, Syntheses
spiritual, etc. — of the human being on the other. By [Brussels] 138 (1957) ¢ Gnosis: Etudes et Commen-
means of these diagrams he presents what he thinks taires sur la Tradition ésotérique de l’Orthodoxie ori-
to be the > correspondences between the seven/ entale, 3 vols., Paris: La Colombe, vol. 1, 1961; Cycle
eight parts of the universe (for instance, the Milky Exotérique; vol. 2, 1962; Cycle Mésotérique; vol. 3,
1965; Cycle ésotérique, Paris: New ed. La Baconnieére:
Way, the Sun, etc.), the seven musical notes (from A
1972 @ English ed.: Gnosis: Study and Commentaries
back to A), the various stages of a person’s spiritual on the Esoteric Tradition of Eastern Orthodoxy, New-
development, and/or the tripartition body/soul/ bury (MA): Praxis Institute Press, ed. and intr. by
spirit. He goes as far as to apply the “Great Robin Amis, translated by Manek d’Oncien and Robin
Octave” to the eight items into which he divides the Amis, 3 vols., 1992-1993 (1st ed. 1989) ¢ La Monar-
Paternoster, thereby making each of them corre- chie russe, Paris: Payot, 1972.
spond to a musical note.
Mouravieff’s speculations extend to such domains Lit.: Bulletin d'information de Madame Larissa Mou-
ravieff (see in particular issue dated June 1967,
as politics and sexuality. In politics, he is far from
Geneva) # William Patrick Patterson & Barbara A.
being the elitist and pessimist that most proponents Patterson (eds.), Taking With the Left Hand: Ennea-
of the “Traditionalist School” (Guénon, Schuon, gram Craze, People of the Bookmark, and The
etc.) — to which he obviously did not belong —appear Mouravieff “Phenomenon”, Fairfax (CA): Arete Com-
to be. For instance, he endorses the existence of munications, 1998.
international organizations (like the UNO) and gives
advice about how to complement them with spiri- ANTOINE FAIVRE

--- Page 232 ---
MUSIC I: ANTIQUITY 808
Music I: Antiquity Dionysus. Although they were formalised in an
early stage, came to be mixed up and contributed
Music was a highly developed art in the ancient to the development of Greek tragedy, there was a
world. From very early texts and a number of musi- certain tradition ascribing a different impact to
cal scores, from representations in visual art and these hymns. In the evolved traditions, the contrast
actual instruments that have been found in excava- between Apollo and Dionysus, one of the favourite
tions, a whole spectrum of musical practice and subjects of many authors, was also detected in the
theory has been recovered for virtually every moods brought about by their specific hymns.
ancient culture. Given the aural nature of music, it There are many more examples of Greek ideas
is almost impossible to reconstruct the sounds of on the emotional or moral impact and influence of
antiquity, but much progress has been made in tunes, modes, and musical instruments. Many of
reconstructing both the technical aspects of ancient these belong to a type of popular psychology, for
musical culture — instruments, tonality and musical instance attributing different moods and effects to
theory — and the emotional impact music was different instruments. Thus, the lyre was associated
thought to have on humans. Music played a perva- with silent inspiration and poetic contemplation,
sive role in many religions of antiquity, in public whereas the aulos, the instruments of courtesans
festivals and temple rituals, in the cultic life of pri- no less than that of cult musicians, moved men to
vate groups dedicated to the worship of a deity of act. In two different cases, the importance of such
choice, and as one of the options open to humans ideas was more pervasive.
to acquire a deeper knowledge of the world or of In the first place, there were types of music and
the divine and thus aid in the goal of releasing the musical instruments that came to be associated
soul from the bonds of matter. chiefly with the non-civic Greek and (later) Roman
In most religions of the ancient world, music was cults, in particular with the so-called mystery cults.
a prominent element in temple rituals. In this, as in The cult of Cybele or the Mother of the Gods (the
so many other aspects, temple ritual resembled Roman Mater Magna) was associated chiefly in
court ritual. In the temple, the house of the god, the Greece with tympana and with the loud noise that
god was entertained with food and drink, with these drums produced in the rituals of the Mother.
prayers and rituals and with music. The gods of Other instruments, cymbals and flutes also were
Mesopotamia had a small ensemble play for them associated with the rites of the Mother, especially in
when they took their meals, just as the god of Israel their Roman context, with the cult of Cybele and
enjoyed songs sung for him to the accompaniment Attis. These instruments not only recalled the
of the lyre and the harp. The central rite of animal actual use of types of instrumental music in the cult
sacrifice in ancient Greece was always accompa- of these deities, but their sound or the instruments
nied by the playing of flutes and eventually came to themselves seem to have become carriers of mean-
be accompanied by the singing of hymns. For most ing. Especially the sound of the tympanum
modern readers, these hymns are texts: that is how was widely held to produce certain psychological
they have been preserved and how they are pub- or religious transformations, moving worshippers
lished. They are, therefore, sometimes studied as if to dance, shout and become enraptured by the
they were prayers, but this they most certainly were goddess.
not. They were, rather, cult songs composed, often In the second place, with much more lasting suc-
in competitions in the context of festivals, by pro- cess, from the 5th century B.C.E. onwards, music
fessional poets and singers to please the deity and came to be developed spectacularly as one of the
extol his or her virtues, and to memorize the deeds sciences. This development was already in antiq-
of men of past or present generations. Festivals in uity attributed to Pythagoras and even Orpheus,
ancient Greece, following the cultic calendar of the and it is very well possible that there was a keen
individual cities, usually consisted of sacrifices and interest in music in early Pythagorean and Orphic
solemn rituals as well as competitions in sports, circles; but the methodical foundations of “Pytha-
poetry, and music and the performance of dances, gorean” music theory were laid by Aristoxenos, a
mask plays or mummeries and drama. pupil of Aristotle. In Pythagorean and Platonic
Two types of cult hymn stand out in importance: doctrine, the creation and order of the cosmos was
the paean and the dithyramb. Both probably origi- connected to numbers, and these functioned not
nated in short, very ancient ritual cries: ie ie paian only as the symbols of certain concepts (for exam-
and thriambe respectively. The paean was a song of ple, 1 is “mind”, 3 is “whole”, ro is “perfect”), but
gratitude dedicated to Apollo; the dithyramb orig- also as ratio and mathematical formula [> Num-
inally a hymn sung in the context of the cult of ber Symbolism]. Number is “harmony”: the per-

--- Page 233 ---
809 MUSIC I; ANTIQUITY
fect harmony with which the cosmos was created. can represent the seven planets, and that the seven
On the basis of the recognition that all musical planets were thought to be characterised by their
intervals are determined by numerical ratios, it is own individual tones, producing a heavenly har-
also the harmony of earthly music. The harmony or mony. Demetrius writes that the Egyptian priests
music of the cosmos is further developed in the idea chanted the seven vowels “in succession” and his
of the “music of the spheres”, the idea that the words suggest a musical/tonal adaptation.
heavenly bodies resound in a perfect harmony, This passage is often connected with Hermetic
brought forth by the relations of their distances and writings. In > Hermetic literature, music is very
speeds. commonly encountered, in many different appreci-
At the centre of Pythagorean wisdom lies the so- ations. This seems to be an important difference
called “tetractys”, or “four-group”, generally visu- with Christian Gnostics, for although both Her-
alized as a triangle made up of the numbers 1, 2, 3 metists and Gnostics must have been “singing com-
and 4, which add up to ro. The most important munities” (witness also the caption “secret song
intervals derived from these numbers are the octave number 4” and the hymn itself in C.H. 13) the use
(2:1), the fifth (3:2) and the fourth (4:3). From of musical imagery and speculation in Hermetic
these, other intervals are derived, such as, for literature is much more prominent than it is in
example, the second, which is the difference Gnostic texts. As is the case with their views on the
between the fifth and the fourth (9:8). These math- nature of the world, Hermetic appreciations of
ematical foundations of musical intervals allow of music seem to have differed. In the Asclepius,
a sheer endless series of speculations and deriva- the heavenly and earthly harmonies are praised
tions. Thus, in the Greek intellectual tradition (Ascl. 9) and the study of music is explicitly recom-
music was not only an art, used for entertainment mended as one of the best methods to know how
or the creation of a solemn atmosphere, but more everything is ordered (Ascl. 13). In the same pas-
importantly a science, and an earthly reflection of sage, however, it is more or less debunked in favour
higher truths. Plato used music as a cosmological of the “true” philosophy, which makes no use of
paradigm in the Timaeus, the influence of which technical sciences whatsoever. The first part of the
can hardly be overestimated in Western intellectual treatise C.H. 18 is a fully worked-out metaphor,
culture. Music was thought to have a direct explaining the works of God, ‘the tireless musician’
influence on human behaviour, to possess educa- in terms of the professional training and activities
tional functions and play an important role in the of a musician. It is particularly in descriptions of
development of character. These ideas are con- the ascent of the soul, through the planetary spheres
nected with the more popular notions of what with their proper sounds, that we may suspect
music does, but were given a completely new foun- musical imagery. In fact, descriptions of the experi-
dation in the development of “ancient Greek music ence of reaching the supra-cosmic realm (the eighth
theory”, which is the name of a fairly large body of and the ninth sphere) generally use the language of
Greek musical writings, that range in date from the music: the soul sings hymns to the supreme deity in
4th century B.C.E. to the 4th-5th century C.E. the eighth sphere with the souls of the blessed and
Ancient Greek music theory expressly tried to hears even sweeter music from the ninth sphere
stay as far removed from musical practice as possi- (C.H. I.26). The most fully worked out ideas on
ble. These writings were written neither by, nor for this subject can be found in the Discourse on the
practising musicians, but wanted to serve other, Eighth and the Ninth, where, however, the
less mundane, purposes. The noetic quality of supreme music in the eighth sphere is said to be an
music lay, chiefly, not in listening to it, but in under- internal song, sung in silence, without sound. Just
standing how it worked and what its (mathemati- before the experience of the Self, the ego of the text
cal) foundations revealed about the nature of describes himself in the following words: ‘I am the
being. It is almost inevitable that this, in turn, instrument of your spirit. Mind is your plectrum,
should have given rise to musical adaptations of and your counsel plucks me’. Thus, from the cult
these new ideas, attempts to put them to practical musician pleasing his god to God playing his
use, to use music as an instrument of salvation. human instruments, musical imagery, theory and
This may indeed have been the case. There is practice have contributed greatly to the systematic
an often-quoted passage from pseudo-Demetrius, development of ideas and belief systems on the
De Elocutione 71, on the seven Greek vowels relations between the different realms of being.
(AEEIOUO), which are commonly encountered in
the magical papyri and similar ritual texts from late Lit.: W. Burkert, Lore and Science in Ancient Pytha-
antiquity. It is well known that the seven vowels goreanism, Cambridge, MA, 1972 # G. Fowden, The

--- Page 234 ---
MUSIC I: ANTIQUITY 810
Egyptian Hermes: A Historical Approach to the Late tion lies the relation between divine creation and
Pagan Mind, Cambridge, 1986 ¢ E.A. Lippmann, number, the idea that the cosmos was created
Musical Thought in Ancient Greece, New York, 1975 according to mathematical principles. The numeri-
¢ T.J. Mathiesen, Apollo’s Lyre: Greek Music and
cal ratios that created Plato’s World Soul are
Music Theory in Antiquity and the Middle Ages,
reflected in musical consonances: the numbers one
Lincoln/London, 1999 ¢ E.G. Naerebout, Attractive
Performances: Ancient Greek Dance. Three Prelimi- and two form the ratio of the octave, two and three
nary Studies, Amsterdam, 1997 # M.L. West, Ancient that of the fifth, three and four that of the fourth,
Greek Music, Oxford, 1992. eight and nine that of the second. According to the
ancient sources, the harmony of the cosmos was
ALBERT DE JONG & MARIKEN TEEUWEN musically realised by the eight planetary spheres
revolving around the earth. These brought forth a
Music II: Middle Ages perfect harmony of musical tones that were deter-
mined by aspects measured in number: their dis-
In the medieval worldview, music powerfully tances from each other, their velocities or the size of
reflects the divine order of the cosmos. Through the their orbits.
study of its principles, human beings will come In the Middle Ages, the ancient idea of a sound-
closer to grasping the meaning of creation itself. ing cosmos was readily adopted. From Carolingian
This view is apparent from medieval treatises on times onwards, speculations on the actual music of
musical theory and philosophical texts that touch the planets are attested. In the 11th century, when
on the subject of music, but also from liturgical the system of the eight church modes was well
texts and from poetry or prose in which the mirac- established, relations were established between
ulous harmony of creation is praised. It is very planets and church modes. The numbers of cre-
difficult, however, to point at evidence in the music ation, adopted from the classical heritage, were
practice of the time. There are no records of exper- given Christian interpretations, and medieval spec-
iments in which the power of music is actually put ulations on the harmony of the heavenly spheres
to the test, and the evidence for a firm belief in it are an intricate mixture of classical and Christian
remains restricted to texts. cosmology, theory of harmony and > number sym-
The whole concept of scientific thinking on the bolism. The earliest examples are found in music
subject of music is essentially classical in nature. treatises such as Aurelian of RéOme’s Musica disci-
The sources of musical thinking of the Middle Ages plina (9th century), and Regino of Priim’s Epistola
faithfully reproduce central pieces of classical de harmonica institutione (early roth century). The
theory and are firmly rooted in the Pythagorean ideal music of the heavens remained a popular
and Platonic traditions. The myth of Pythagoras, topic throughout the Middle Ages. > Hildegard of
who discovered the basic ratios of musical conso- Bingen’s mystical allusions to the power of music
nances when passing a blacksmith’s shop, figures in are a well-known example: she is convinced that
many medieval treatises on music, as do specula- music and harmony are present in every aspect of
tions on the music of the planetary spheres, and God’s creation and especially in the human soul
classical myths on the (magical) power of music itself. Our natural love of music and the human
(e.g. Orpheus and Eurydice, Amphion and Arion). ability to be moved by it can be explained through
Two themes seem particularly relevant: the role of the craving of mankind to be reunited with its
music in the whole of creation, and its effect on the Creator.
individual. The idea that the heavenly planets and the bibli-
The music of the cosmos, musica mundana in cal choirs of angels join in a collective and contin-
Boethius’ influential treatise De institutione uous song of praise to honour their Creator is
musica, was part of the classical heritage: Plato’s present in the earliest sources of the liturgy of the
Timaeus (4th century B.C.E.) was translated and Western church. Only in the 12th century, however,
commented upon by the 4th-century author Cal- under the influence of scholasticism, attempts were
cidius, the sth-century author Macrobius wrote a made to systematically bring ancient and Christian
commentary on Cicero’s Somnium Scipionis. In cosmology to a synthesis. In the 12th-century poem
Augustine of Hippo’s De musica (387-389), Mar- Naturalis concordia vocum cum planetis, for
tianus Capella’s De nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurit example, the nine choirs of angels surrounding
(sth century) and in Boethius’ De institutione God’s throne are related to notes from the Greek
musica (ca. 500-510) the ancient tradition on the system and to planets.
theme is well established and handed down to the In the second half of the 13th and in the 14th cen-
medieval scholars. At the basis of the ancient tradi- tury, when the Aristotelian influence on Western

--- Page 235 ---
811 MUSIC II: MIDDLE AGES
thinking grew stronger, the idea of an actually as noble, worthy or solemn, the Phrygian or third
sounding cosmos was viewed with scepticism in mode is always associated with excitement, vio-
certain scholarly circles. In his Speculum musicae lence and fierceness. Although certain general char-
(1321-1324) Jacobus of Liége, for example, denied acterisations are concurrent, the details of each
the existence of a planetary music. He argued that system relating church modes to characters are
if the massive planets would bring forth actual different.
sounds, they would be so loud as to have made us At the very end of the Middle Ages authors such
deaf. Guido of Saint-Denis (Tractatus de tonis, as Franchinus Gafurius (Practica musice, 1496)
ca. 1300) and Heinricus Helene (Summula musice, and Bartolomeo Ramis de Pareja (Musica practica,
ca. 1360) treat the music of the planets as a 1482), designed systems in which modes are
metaphor, and no longer take the concept literally. related to characters and corresponding planets:
But at the end of the Middle Ages, when Aris- the Dorian mode, for example, corresponds to the
totelianism was declining and Platonism was Sun, the Phrygian to Mars, etc. Building on earlier
flourishing, the concept was again made welcome models Bartolomeo Ramis de Pareja went even
by scholarly thinking, and received new attention further: he related each mode not only to a corre-
in the theoretical works on music of, for example, sponding planet, but also to a colour and humor
Bartolomeo Ramis de Pareja (Musica practica, (sanguis, colera, phlegma and melancholia). These
1482) and Franchinus Gafurius (Practica musice, speculative models, which reflect the thorough
1496). belief in the power of music over the material and
The influence of music on the individual, the immaterial world, over the human body, mind and
effectus or affectus of music, is a classical topos that soul, formed the basis for the 16th- and especially
kept receiving scholarly attention throughout the 17th-century musical experiments in the field of >
Middle Ages. Music was believed to have an effect mysticism and > magic.
on the body and mind of human beings. It was able
Lit.: H. Abert, Die Musikanschauung des Mittelalters
to disturb the inner harmony of body and soul, or
und thre Grundlagen, Halle a.d. S., 1905 ¢ L. Spitzer,
to restore it when it was disturbed through illness
“Classical and Christian Ideas of World Harmony:
or emotion. In ancient sources the power of music Prolegomena to an Interpretation of the Word ‘Stim-
over individuals is illustrated by anecdotes. Its mung’”, Traditio 2 (1944), 409-464 & Traditio 3
healing power is illustrated with stories in which (1945), 307-364 @ J. Haar, Musica Mundana: Varia-
madmen are cured from their frenzy, babies are tions on a Pythagorean Theme, diss. Harvard Univer-
soothed, youth is kept to the straight and narrow sity, 1961 # R. Hammerstein, Die Musik der Engel:
Untersuchungen zur Musikanschauung des Mittelal-
path, all by playing them the right kind of music. Its
ters, Berne/Munchen, 1962 # idem, “Pythagorean
power to inflame is demonstrated in examples of Harmony of the Universe”, in: Dictionary of the His-
armies triumphing because of the fierceness of their tory of Ideas, New York, 1973, 4, 38f. ¢ B. Minxel-
music. In the Patristic and medieval tradition, bib- haus, Pythagoras MuUSICUS: Zur Rezeption der
lical examples are added to this list: the story of pythagoreischen Musiktheorie als quadrivialer Wissen-
David curing Saul from his madness by playing him schaft im lateinischen Mittelalter, Bonn/Bad Godes-
berg, 1976 # H. Schavernoch, Die Harmonie dermusic, or of the prophet Elisha, on whom the spirit
Spharen, Freiburg [Breisgau], 1981 ¢ J. Godwin, Har-
of the Lord descended after he had summoned a
monies of Heaven and Earth: The Spiritual Dimension
cithar player to perform for him. of Music from Antiquity to the Avant-Garde, London,
From the rith century onwards, attempts were 1987 # A. Barbera (ed.), Music Theory and Its Sources:
made to attach ethical characters to concrete musi- Antiquity and the Middle Ages, Notre Dame, 1990 ¢
cal modes. These were partly modelled after FE. Zaminer (ed.), Geschichte der Musiktheorie, Band 3:
ancient sources, but since the ancient sources them- Rezeption des antiken Fachs im Mittelalter, Darm-
stadt, 1990 « J. Godwin, The harmony ofthe Spheres:
selves were not very consistent, the relations
A sourcebook of the Pythagorean tradition in music,
between ancient heritage and medieval renewal are Rochester/Vermont, 1993 ¢ several articles in Die
garbled and often only superficial. Guido of Arezzo Musik in Geschichte und Gegenwart, Zweite, neu-
(Micrologus, ca. 1025) was the first to explicitly bearbeitete Ausgabe, L. Finscher (ed.), 9 Sachteile, 12
relate church modes to certain characters, and Personenteile, Kassel, Basel, London, etc., 1994-
scholars such as Hermannus of Reichenau in progress [spec. M. Walter & A. Jaschinski,
“Engelsmusik-Teufelsmusik”, Sachteil 3, 8-27; P. von(Musica, ca. 1050), Frutolf (Breviarium de musica,
Naredi-Rainer, “Harmonie”, Sachteil 4, 116-132;
ca. 1100), and Johannes of Afflighem (De musica,
L. Rohrich, “Musikmythen”, Sachteil 6, 1421-1440]
ca. 1100) followed his example with their own S. Gersh, Concord in Discourse: Harmonics and Semi-
interpretations. In many of these systems the otics in Late Classical and Early Medieval Platonism,
Dorian or first mode, for example, is characterised Berlin/New York, 1996 « FE. Hentschel (ed.), Musik

--- Page 236 ---
MUSIC II: MIDDLE AGES 812
und die Geschichte der Philosophie und Naturwis- a distance”, was Plotinus’s Enneads, a Neoplatonic
senschaften im Mittelalter, Leiden/Boston/K6ln, 1998 text [> Neoplatonism] unknown to medieval
¢ E. Vetter, Concentrische cirkels: Modus, affect, sfeer scholars that — Ficino published in 1492 and also
en tijd in een middeleeuws muziektheoretisch gedicht, used as a source for his own De vita libri tres
diss. Utrecht University, Amsterdam 2000 ¢ J. Haar,
(1489), the most influential modern work on musi-
“Music of the spheres”, in: Sadie (ed.), The New Grove
Dictionary of Music and Musicians, 2nd ed., 29 vols., cal magic. Plotinus’s image of a universal lyre con-
London etc., 2001, vol. 10, 487-488 « M. Teeuwen, necting all levels of being through resonance was
Harmony and the Music of the Spheres: The Ars now made concrete by using two lutes: a string of
Musica in Ninth-Century Commentaries on Martianus one instrument was plucked, which moved the
Capella, Leiden/Boston/K6ln: E.J. Brill, 2002 ¢ several equivalent string of another lute lying on a nearby
chapters in Th. Christensen (ed.), The Cambridge His-
table.
tory of Western Music Theory, Cambridge, 2002.
The linkage between cosmic and human har-
mony via stringed instruments was long estab-
MARIKEN TEEUWEN
lished in Western philosophy, and can be traced
back via Plato’s Timaeus to the Pythagoreans be-
Music III: Renaissance fore him. Pythagoras’s discovery of the numerical
proportions governing consonance, leading to his
Scholarly discussion of the relationship between invention of the monochord, was recounted in
music, > hermetism and > magic in the 16th and Boethius’s De musica, the standard university text
17th centuries still takes its point of departure from on music, as well as more esoteric sources such as
the authoritative texts by D.P. Walker, Frances Iamblichus’s De mysteriis (ed. Ficino 1497). Yet the
Yates and Joscelyn Godwin. As their work shows, idea of actually putting Pythagorean and Neopla-
together with the more recent studies of Gary Tom- tonic mysteries to the test seems to have been a 16th
linson and Penelope Gouk, music played an espe- century development. It occurred around the same
cially significant role in the “occult philosophy” time that poets and musicians began to make
[> occult/occultism] that became so fashionable in serious attempts to recreate the effects of ancient
European culture in the decades around 1600. This music.
fascination not only manifested itself in the philo- In tracing this process, musicologists have chiefly
sophical literature which will be reviewed below, focused on the 1570s experiments by Count Bardi’s
but was also expressed through artistic endeavours Florentine camerata and Jean-Antoine de Baif’s
and practical experiments. Indeed, historians of Académie de Poésie et la Musique in Paris to revive
science have shown that it was the emphasis on a lost Greek rhapsodic art. The impact of Neopla-
experiental knowledge and the magus’s ability to tonic doctrine on secular courtly entertainments in
harness occult forces and bring about predictable the 16th and 17th centuries is well documented.
effects that led 17th century experimental philoso- Much less scholarly attention has been paid to
phers to appropriate these powerful features of attempts at recreating ancient theurgic and magical
natural magic into their new form of scientific prac- practices in the context of Reformation and
tice. However, most occult experiments involving Counter-Reformation struggles over proper modes
music will never be recovered, not only because of of public and private worship. There is plenty of
their inherently secret and dangerous nature, but early modern literature celebrating music’s power
also because the vocal and instrumental practices as a vehicle for poetic frenzy, spiritual revelation,
involved were never written down. prophetic madness, and rapture, but there is almost
Music, or more precisely, “harmony” was cen- no evidence how or whether these actual practices,
tral to the process in which understandings of including incantations for summoning gods and
“occult” and “scientific” ways of knowing were demons (theurgy) actually took place other than in
decisively transformed in the so-called Scientific the theatre. Campanella’s magical activities with
Revolution. Music’s relevance to early modern eso- Pope Urban VIII during the 1620s may have been
teric wisdom (scientific, philosophical, religious, or exceptional, or just unusual because written evi-
magical) lay in its power to mediate between mate- dence for them remains.
rial and immaterial realms, operating at the thresh- During the 16th century several important new
old between inner and outer worlds, between body, works addressing music’s relationship to magic and
mind and soul. The most popular expression of this the occult were published. At the same time new
magical power during the period was the phenom- editions and translations of key ancient and
enon of “sympathy”, or musical resonance. The medieval texts began to circulate more widely
locus classicus for this example of occult “action at through numerous printed editions. Apart from the

--- Page 237 ---
813 MUSIC III: RENAISSANCE
Hermetic corpus and the Asclepius (ed. Ficino), the and divine influences, as well as recreating the
most important ancient sources which explictly hymns of Orpheus and David.
addressed music’s powers to communicate with > Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa’s De occulta
demonic spirits included the Orphic Hymns (ed. philosophia (first version completed 1510, pub-
Ficino 1462), the Chaldaean Oracles (ed. Patrizi lished as greatly enlarged edition in 1533), was
1491), the Old Testament Psalms, > Augustine’s another early influential 16th-century text which
Confessions, and the Jewish Kabbalah [> Jewish ensured music’s prominence in the “occult synthe-
Influences] mediated through > Johannes Reuch- sis” of the late Renaissance. Reprinted in numerous
lin’s De arte cabalistica libri tres (1517) . editions down to the 18th century, and translated
This body of theological and mystical literature into many vernacular languages, this text proved to
overlapped with the tradition of speculative har- be the main channel for introducing Ficino’s con-
monics, a discipline dealing with the mathematical troversial music-spirit theory to a wider audience.
and philosophical dimensions of music theory, At the same time it popularised the basic principles
and especially focusing on the hidden proportions of Neoplatonic philosophy and natural magic. Part
governing the structure of the universe. Among the of Ficino’s rules for planetary music, combined
ancient harmonic texts which received renewed with Pico’s account of the use of Orphic hymns in
critical attention in the 16th century were Ptolemy’s magic, are found in Book I, cap. 71 on incanta-
Harmonics, Euclid’s Section on the Canon, and tions. According to Agrippa, nothing is more
Boethius’s De musica. Although this latter work efficacious in natural magic than these hymns, used
was no longer considered useful for teaching the according to a due harmony. Ignoring the Church’s
principles of musical practice, Boethius’s tripartite prohibition on magical operations, Agrippa ex-
structure of musica instrumentalis, musica humana plains how the instrument of enchanters is ‘a most
and musica mundana, still proved to be a valuable pure harmoniacall spirit, warm, breathing, living’,
model for scholars and theologians seeking to dis- that can be used for compelling and directing plan-
cover the secret harmonies in God’s Creation (e.g. etary angels as well as simply conditioning the
see Fludd below). operator’s own spirit into a suitably receptive state
~ Francesco Giorgio’s De harmonia mundi for heavenly influences.
totius cantica (1525) was an important 16th-cen- A somewhat less dangerous discussion of instru-
tury contribution to this Boethian tradition of spec- mental music and the corresponding harmonies in
ulative harmonics, which paradoxically led to new celestial and human bodies is found in Book Two
practical applications. Thus, for example, the on mathematical magic (caps 24 to 28). This sec-
numerical principles that Giorgio found in the tion closes with a celebration of the power of music
heavens were incorporated at the same time into to attune the soul to the divine, and to drive out
the architectural plans of San Francisco della Vigna demons: ‘Hence by the ancient prophets and
in Venice. Fifty years later Giorgio’s Pythagorean, fathers, who knew these harmonical mysteries,
Neoplatonic and Kabbalistic studies received fresh singing and musical sounds were brought into
impetus through its translation by > Guy Le Feévre sacred services’. However, towards the end of Book
de la Boderie as L’harmonie du monde (1575), a Three on prayers, sacraments and other religious
work which had a major impact on French, as well rites (caps 58-64), Agrippa places invocations
as English, Renaissance literature and philosophy. to God on the same level with pagan or magical
Le Févre de la Boderie also published translations incantations. As Walker has observed, although
of Ficino’s and > Giovanni Pico della Mirandola’s Agrippa’s exposition of Ficino’s spiritual music
works. Together with Pontus de Tyard’s Solitaire gave it a wide diffusion, it may also have frightened
premiére (1552) and Solitaire second, ou discours people away from it by showing just how danger-
de la musique (1552), Le Fevre de la Boderie’s ous Neoplatonic magic was from a Christian point
learned editions of these Italian Neoplatonist of view.
sources provided the intellectual foundations for The attraction of universal harmony and the
the French academies of Ronsard and Baif. These occult philosophy reached a peak in the first half of
courtly schools sought to effect a proper union of the 17th century. The most comprehensive text to
music and poetry as the first stage of ascent appear on the subject was > Athanasius Kircher’s
towards ultimate union with the divine. In a soci- Musurgia universalis (Rome, 1650). Like so many
ety rent apart by religious and political upheaval, of Kircher’s voluminous writings, this work con-
where Catholics and Protestants alike sought for tinued to be an important source for scholars in-
reconciliation, there was a powerful incentive to terested in music, magic and mysticism even into
restore harmony to mankind by realigning cosmic the 2oth century. Music played a prominent role

--- Page 238 ---
MUSIC III: RENAISSANCE 814
in early 17th-century esotericism because of the were eventually incorporated into mainstream nat-
importance attached to musical practice at leading ural philosophy, most notably through the optical
centres of occult studies, most notably the courts and mathematical treatises of > Isaac Newton. Yet
of > Rudolph II in Prague and Prince Moritz of the importance of Fludd’s History in communicat-
Hessen (who was a noted musician). Thus ing abstract musical principles to 17th-century
although Kircher himself promoted what was scholars (rather than to professional musicians)
meant to be a Catholic Counter-Reformation has been completely overlooked. Because Fludd
vision of universal harmony, he nevertheless also follows Giorgio’s strategy of organising the History
drew on important Protestant sources published around Boethius’s tripartite classification of music,
earlier in the century. Of these texts, Johannes and privileges the Pythagoran scale, the work has
Kepler’s Harmonices mundi libri V (1619) and > been dismissed as speculative in the pejorative
Robert Fludd’s Utriusque cosmi... historia sense of the term.
(1617-1619) have attracted the most scholarly The chief significance of the History lies in its
interest, because of their disagreement over how to use of powerful visual imagery, realised through
discover the true harmonies governing nature. engravings by the son of his Oppenheim publisher
The Kepler-Fludd controversy has been sig- Theodore de Bry. Another occult classic which
nificant in defining the boundaries between science these men produced at exactly the same time was >
and magic, between “true” and “false” philosophy, Michael Maier’s musical-alchemical emblem book
not just in its own time but also in more recent Atalanta fugiens (1618). In the context of the pres-
attempts to distinguish between occult and sci- ent article, the importance of this work lies in the
entific mentalities. Music played an important role author’s belief that the practices of both > alchemy
in this debate. Kepler (1571-1630), for example, and music rely on the manipulation of the spiritus
claimed that his discovery of the correspondence mundi, a view shared by Fludd and one which of
between the harmonies of modern polyphonic course ultimately derives from Ficino. Precisely the
practice and the ratios governing the elliptical same belief is embodied in the famous illustration
motions of the six planets was grounded in empir- of the magus-physician’s alchemical laboratory
ical observation. Therefore a true analogy existed from > Heinrich Khunrath’s Amphiteatrum sapi-
between these planetary and musical systems, both entiae aeternae Christiano-Kabalisticum (1595,
of which derived from the geometric archetypes in 1609). The theosopher himself is shown devoutly
the mind of God. Kepler explicitly differentiated at prayer on the left of picture, and the instruments
this from Fludd’s approach to cosmic harmonies, he uses for alchemical investigations into the fun-
saying that the latter’s portrayal of the divine damental secrets of nature are towards the right.
monochord had no other foundation than the Most prominently on display, however, are four
imagination. A similar line was taken by the French stringed musical instruments on the table at the
Minim friar Marin Mersenne (1588-1648) in his centre foreground (including a harp which isa clear
Traité de ’harmonie universelle (1627) in which he allusion to King David). The inscription beneath
criticised Fludd’s schema for having no correspon- translates roughly as ‘Sacred music (is) the escape
dence with any measurable quantities of the world. from sadness and evil spirits because the spirit
Augustine’s De Musica served as a theoretical basis (spiritus) rejoices cheerfully in a heart filled with
for Mersenne’s own empirical investigations into pious joy’. This image provides a rare glimpe of
musical phenomena, while the Confessions pro- how Ficino’s musical magic might be transmuted
vided grounds for his vigorous rejection of Fludd’s into a practice that at least outwardly conformed to
natural magic. Protestant reformist sensibilities.
Mersenne’s discovery of the mathematical laws None of these works by Khunrath, Maier and
governing musical pitch (“Mersenne’s laws”) rap- Fludd achieved wide circulation, and it was only in
idly became a cornerstone of the so-called “new the late 2oth century that their images began to be
experimental philosophy”, even while Fludd’s sys- reproduced on a significant scale. Yet the impor-
tem of hidden > correspondences was apparently tance of Fludd’s work in particular is due to the
rejected on the grounds that they were imaginary. influence it has exercised on a relatively small num-
Yet despite trenchant criticism of Fludd’s allegedly ber of scholars since first appearing. For example,
“false” representations of occult harmonies (which although Fludd’s image of the divine monochord
are based on a different set of conventions than was strongly criticised by Mersenne, he neverthe-
those privileged by Kepler and modern science), less copied the idea of using a picture to illustrate
many of the musico-magical principles expressed this particular manifestation of cosmic harmony.
in his History of the Macrocosm and Microcosm The principal route by which Fludd’s concepts

--- Page 239 ---
815 MUSIC IV: 18TH CENTURY TO THE PRESENT
became more widely known, however, was via Kircher or Newton. While many of the techniques
Kircher, who plagiarized many of Fludd’s diagrams musicians used to arouse or imitate particular emo-
for his own purposes. tional effects seemed truly wondrous in the early
Like all his lavishly illustrated works, Kircher’s 16th century, by the 18th century these were sub-
Musurgia universalis achieved an international cir- ject to scientific classification and analysis. Simi-
culation through the institutional backing of the larly, most of the ancient and even modern occult
Jesuits. By the late 17th century his books had texts 17th-century philosphers had access to were
become the most widely disseminated sources almost completely unavailable in Ficino’s lifetime,
available on esoteric and occult wisdom. Thus even only becoming more available through the medium
as the “Scientific Revolution” gained momentum, of print.
the accessibility of the Musurgia ensured that
natural magic continued to function as a valid Lit.: Joscelyn Godwin, Robert Fludd: Hermetic Philo-
descriptive and analytical category for dealing with sopher and Surveyor of Two Worlds, London: Rout-
ledge & Kegan Paul, 1979 ¢ idem, Athanasius Kircher:musical phenomena. Themes raised in the Musur-
A Renaissance Man and the Ouest for Lost Knowl-
gia which continued to attract debate in the
edge, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1979 Pene-
Enlightenment include the origins and develop- lope Gouk, Music, Science and Natural Magic in
ment of human music and its magical and religious Seventeenth-Century England, New Haven and Lon-
applications; the classification of musical styles and don: Yale University Press, 1999 ¢ Penelope Gouk
their correspondence to the human passions; and (ed.), Musical Healing in Cultural Contexts, Aldershot:
musical devices that relied on hidden sources of Ashgate, 2000 # Gary Tomlinson, Music in Renais-
sance Magic: Toward a Historiography of Others,
power (for which he drew heavily on Fludd). Book
Chicago and London: Chicago University Press, 1993
9, which deals explicitly with magical topics, ¢ D.P. Walker, Spiritual and Demonic Magic from
focuses on music’s power to affect the mind and Ficino to Campanella, London: Warburg Institute,
body in ways that can be explained in purely “nat- 1958 @ D.P. Walker, Music, Spirit and Language in the
ural” but hidden (i.e. occult) terms. Much of the Renaissance, edited by P.M. Gouk, London: Variorum,
first part is taken from Mersenne, and deals with 1985 @ Robert S. Westman, “Nature, Art, and Psyche:
Jung, Pauli, and the Kepler-Fludd Polemic”, in B. Vick-the everyday psychological and emotional effects of
ers (ed.), Occult and Scientific Mentalities in the
music. His examples of music’s more exceptional
Renaissance, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
and explicitly therapeutic properties are drawn 1984. 177-229 # Frances A. Yates, The French Acade-
from both ancient and modern literature, the most mies ofthe Sixteenth Century, London: Warburg Insti-
notable being the cure of Saul’s melancholy tute, 1947 ¢ Frances A. Yates, The Rosicrucian
through David’s psalms, the amazing story of a Enlightenment, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,
Danish king aroused to frenzy and murder by his 1972.
courtly musician, and the cure of the Tarantula’s
bite. A majestic conclusion is reached in Book 10 PENELOPE GOUK
which situates the work within the broader context
of musica humana and musica mundana. Although Music IV: 18th Century to the Present
Kepler and Fludd were both Protestants, and had
taken opposing views about the role of number in It is questionable whether music in itself can be
understanding the world, this did not prevent “esoteric”, as distinct from the texts or associa-
Kircher from appropriating their ideas and show- tions linked to it. Some music might be called eso-
ing how their thinking could be reconciled in his teric in the sense that it appeals to, or is understood
own eclectic synthesis of universal harmony. by, a restricted group of people. Such is the more
Despite the conventional emphasis placed on the abstract fugal work of Bach, the late string quartets
unchanging and secret nature of esoteric wisdom, of Beethoven, and the atonal or serial music of
between 1500 and 1700 some very significant Schoenberg and his followers. But the esotericism
changes took place in music’s relationship to this of such musics, for all their refined emotions and
increasingly accessible philosophical tradition. heightened intellectual content, is not necessarily
Thus although the sympathetic correspondence spiritual. For present purposes, esotericism is in
between macrocosm and microcosm remained a question when music is offered and used in a con-
central feature of occult thinking, the radical text of conscious spiritual development. The field
changes in musical and scientific practice which thus defined excludes merely sacred music, but
took place between early Renaissance and late includes “speculative” music, i.e. the unsounded
Baroque ensured that Ficino or Giorgi’s conception music that gives insight into cosmological and
of “harmony” was quite different from that of numerical mysteries.

--- Page 240 ---
MUSIC IV: 18TH CENTURY TO THE PRESENT 816
The century of F. Couperin (1668-1733), Vivaldi music. These included Charles Fourier (1772-
(1678-1741), Rameau (1683-1764), J.S. Bach 1837), ~ Hoéné Wronski, > P.KG. Lacuria, Louis
(1685-1750) and his sons, D. Scarlatti (1685- Lucas (1816-1863), and the fin-de-siécle figures >
1757), Handel (1685-1759), Gluck (1714-1787), Joséphin Péladan, Charles Henry (1859-1926),
Mozart (1756-1791), Haydn (1732-1809), and the Edmond Bailly (dates unknown) and > Saint-Yves
young Beethoven (1770-1827) was a high point in d’Alveydre. Bailly, active in the French > Theo-
Western music, but from the point of view of sophical Society, was an amateur composer in the
esotericism it was an infertile period. Musical eso- Romantic idiom, and a friend of Debussy and Satie.
tericism has generally been coupled with the His most original work, Le chant des voyelles
Pythagorean philosophy. While in earlier times (1912), was a study of the vowel-invocations found
this had led to the concepts of a musica mundana in Greek magical papyri, together with a realiza-
(“harmony of the spheres”) and a musica humana tion for modern instruments and voices. Saint-
of psycho-physical effects, the Enlightenment Yves, reputedly a talented improviser on the piano
discarded such notions as irrational. Its musical and organ, gave music a large place in his system
aesthetic was not spiritually or cosmically based, of universal knowledge, the Archéometre. The
but rested, like that of the other arts, on the prin- musical supplement to this work, L’Archéometre
ciple of imitation. The primary purpose of music musical (1909), comprises nearly 200 short piano
was thought to be the represention of human pieces in a style to which there is no contemporary
emotions, and its main resource was expressive parallel.
melody. The music dramas of Richard Wagner (1813-
Of the celebrated composers, only two had inter- 1883) have all been interpreted esoterically, espe-
ests bordering on esotericism. J.S. Bach defied the cially The Ring of the Nibelung and Parsifal
fashion of his time in continuing to write learned, regarded as an epic of man’s history and hopes. As
contrapuntal music in encyclopedic cycles (Orgel- his own librettist and the builder of the temple-like
biichlein, Well-tempered Clavier, Klavieriibungen, Bayreuth Festival Playhouse, no one did more than
Musical Offering, Art of Fugue) and in filling his Wagner to actualize the Romantic idea of music
sacred works with numerological significances. as a religious or even mystical experience. A cluster
Mozart’s commitment to > Freemasonry gave of post-Wagnerian composers interested in var-
birth to the Masonic opera, The Magic Flute, ious forms of esotericism, with an indication of
which has been the subject of many esoteric inter- their leanings, includes Gustav Mahler (1860-
pretations. Two notable esotericists of the 18th 1911; Theosophy); Claude Debussy (1862-1918;
century were musically gifted. The Comte de > occultism, numerology), Erik Satie (1862-1925; >
Saint-Germain (1693/94?-1784) worked in Lon- Rosicrucianism), Jan Sibelius (1865-1957; > Free-
don in the 1740s as a musician and composer. > masonry), Alexander Scriabin (1871-1915; Theos-
Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin was a good amateur ophy), Gustav Holst (1874-1934; > astrology; >
violinist, and made use of speculative music in his gnosticism); Arnold Schoenberg (1874-1951; >
first book, Des erreurs et de la vérité (1775). Swedenborg; Kabbalah [> Jewish Influences]),
At the turn of the century, the composer Johann Cyril Scott (1879-1970; Theosophy), Anton
Friedrich Hugo von Dalberg (1760-1812) wrote a Webern (1883-1945; Swedenborg, German >
series of theoretical and imaginative works (espe- Naturphilosophie). However, the involvement of
cially Blicke eines Tonkiinstlers in die Musik der these early modernist composers with esotericism
Geister, 1787; Untersuchung tiber den Ursprung did not long outlast World War I. One exception is
der Harmonie und ihre allmahliche Ausbildung, Scott, whose attempt at a spiritual history of music
1800) that treat music as a vehicle by which the and its effects, Music, Its Secret Influence Through-
soul ascends to higher states, and that approach out the Ages (1933), continued to be reprinted up
harmony in a neo-Pythagorean spirit. Dalberg’s to the end of the century.
work heralded the German Romantic movement The revival of Pythagorean ideas in the 20th cen-
[> Romanticism], which would elevate music to tury was mainly due to two men. > Rudolf Steiner,
the status of a religion. Around 1820, ~ Antoine though not himself a musician, invented the art of
Fabre d’Olivet wrote a treatise on music (La Eurythmy (not to be confused with Jacques-Dal-
Musique expliquée comme science et comme art, croze’s Eurhythmics) and gave many lectures on the
published posthumously) that shares the same as- spiritual significance of music. Music consequently
sumptions and interests as Dalberg’s. Fabre d’Oli- plays a large role in > Anthroposophy, especially in
vet was the first of many French esotericists whose Waldorf education. Hans Kayser (1891-1964),
universal cosmic systems gave an important role to inspired by hints given in the extraordinary work

--- Page 241 ---
817 MUSIC Iv: 18TH CENTURY TO THE PRESENT
of Albert von Thimus (1806-1878), Die harmo- a microcosmically-ordered, Hermetic flavor, in
nikale Symbolik des Alterthums (1868), developed which each part reflects the whole. While some crit-
a comprehensive system of world-explanation ics were repelled by his messianic pretentions, his
through application of the harmonic series and the prestige encouraged a fad among composers of the
“Pythagorean Table” derived therefrom (Lehrbuch 1970s and 1980s for giving music a gloss of Her-
der Harmonik, 1950). Kayser’s work was contin- metic, astrological, alchemical, or mystical refer-
ued by Rudolf Haase (b. 1920) and Werner Schulze ences This was one of several manifestations in
(b. 1952) at the Hans-Kayser Institut fiir harmo- music of the » New Age movement. Another is the
nikale Grundlagenforschung, Vienna. genre of music simply styled “New Age”, charac-
In the 1960s, esoteric ideas began to filter back terized by static, diatonic harmonies, gentle, repet-
into practical music. They first appeared in the itive rhythms, and folksong-like melodies. New
popular field, for instance when the rock-musical Age music is anti-modernist, diametrically opposed
Hair played with the notion of an imminent “Age to both rock ‘n’ roll and to the atonality of the
of Aquarius”. Superficial themes from oriental phi- “classical” avant-garde. Healing qualities are
losophy appeared from the Beatles after their claimed for it, recalling the use of music in the
encounter with Maharishi Mahesh Yogi; scraps of Pythagorean schools.
pseudo-Satanism from the Rolling Stones; Celtic The end of the zoth century saw a strong post-
and magical themes from Robin Williamson and modernist trend in serious music. Philip Glass
the Incredible String Band; Meher Baba’s influence (b. 1937) and John Adams (b. 1947) achieved suc-
from Pete Townshend and The Who. This trend in cess by using some of the techniques of New Age
popular music was part of a broader movement music. The compositions of Arvo Part (b. 1935)
that included the Hippies and Flower Children, the and John Tavener (b. 1944) invite the listener into
mind-altering effects of cannabis, LSD, and mes- contemplative states akin to prayer, with explicit
calin, and a renewal of interest in spiritual philoso- links to the Christian Orthodox tradition and the
phy, esoteric literature, and divination (~ Tarot, Traditionalist school [> Tradition]. The same
astrology, I Ching). period saw a rediscovery of the songs and person-
In the so-called classical field, avant-garde trends ality of + Hildegard von Bingen (1098-1179) and
were split during the 1950s and 1960s between a sudden popularity of Gregorian Chant. Con-
the increasing use of chance and noise, and the nected to this was the increased use of music for
attempt at total control through serialism follow- personal development, especially in active methods
ing Schoenberg and Webern. The leader of the for- using the voice, such as overtone singing. In widen-
mer trend was John Cage (1912-1993), whose ing circles, music was regarded as a bridge to the
music and writings were strongly influenced by sacred, an adjunct to mystical experience, and an
Zen Buddhism, and to a lesser extent by the mysti- agent for the healing of body and soul. The rift
cism of Meister Eckhart. The strength and appeal between classical and popular genres, so evident in
of Cage’s personality affected every one of the arts, music of the zoth century, has become increasingly
holding out the possibility that they might have a irrelevant. These trends seem to hold the promise
spiritual (as distinct from a religious) purpose. This of a return to certain Pythagorean and Platonic
ran counter to the predominant desacralization of ideals.
the arts that characterized the modernist main-
stream. Lit.: Jacques Chailley, The Magic Flute, Masonic
The two avant-garde trends united in the middle- Opera, London: Gollancz, 1972 # Judith A. Eck-
period work of Karlheinz Stockhausen (b. 1928), elmeyer, The Cultural Context of Mozart’s Magic
already a leader of the serialist school, who began Flute, 2 vols., Lewiston: Edwin Mellen Press, 1991
¢ Michael Embach & Joscelyn Godwin, Johann
using overtly spiritual references in the text for
Friedrich Hugo von Dalberg 1760-18 12: Schriftsteller,
improvisation Aus den sieben Tagen and in the Musiker, Domherr, Mainz: Gesellschaft fiir mittel-
six-voice, harmonically-based Stimmung (1968). rheinische Kirchengeschichte, 1998 # Jean Overton
This tendency culminated in Stockhausen’s Licht Fuller, The Comte de Saint Germain, London/The
(1977-), a cycle of seven operas named after the Hague: East-West Publications, 1988, 66-88 ¢ J.O.
days of the week. The cosmogony of Licht revolves Fuller, Cyril Scott and A Hidden School (Theosophical
History Occasional Papers VII), Fullerton, Ca.: His-
around the figures of Michael, Eve, and Lucifer,
tory, 1998 ¢ J. Godwin, Music, Mysticism and Magic:
who are presented in a Gnostic context, specifically A Sourcebook, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,
influenced by The Urantia Book, an anonymous 1986 @ idem, Harmonies of Heaven and Earth: The
“channeled” work of the 1930s. Stockhausen’s Spiritual Dimension of Music from Antiquity to the
composing methods, derived from serialism, have Avant-Garde, London: Thames & Hudson, 1987 ¢

--- Page 242 ---
MUSIC IV: 18TH CENTURY TO THE PRESENT 818
idem, The Mystery of the Seven Vowels in Theory and (mysticism) and the person enjoying this experi-
Practice, Grand Rapids: Phanes Press, 1991 # idem, ence (mystic). This substantivation completed the
Harmony of the Spheres: A Sourcebook of the process inaugurated at the end of the Middle Ages
Pythagorean Tradition in Music, Rochester, Vt.: Inner
by the autonomization of mystical theology in re-
Traditions International, 1993 ¢ idem, Music and the
lation to scholastic and positive theology; and it Occult (French orig. 1991), Rochester, N.Y.: Univer-
sity of Rochester Press, 1995 # idem, “Stockhausen’s continued by the separation of mysticism as an
Donnerstag aus Licht and Gnosticism”, in: Roelof van experience from theology as rational discourse.
den Broek and Wouter J. Hanegraaff (eds.), Gnosis and The semantic proximity between mysticism and
Hermeticism from Antiquity to Modern Times, esotericism has not escaped either the esotericists
Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, or its scholars, whether they assimilate the two
1998, 347-358 ¢ Karlheinz Stockhausen, Texte zur
words or distinguish between them. Historical and
Musik 1977-1984 (Texte zur Musik 5-6), Cologne:
DuMont, 1989 ¢ Ruth Tatlow, Bach and the Riddle of conceptual filiations have been established, not
the Number Alphabet, Cambridge/New York: Cam- without some justification, between esotericism
bridge University Press, 1991 # John Tavener, The and mysticism; these have been based primarily on
Music ofSilence: A Composer’s Testament (Brian Kee- the fact that both are linked to experiences of a
ble, ed.), London/New York: Faber & Faber, 1999 ¢ dimension of reality that escapes natural and com-
Franz Winkler, For Freedom Destined: Mysteries of
mon understanding by the senses and by reason.
Man’s Evolution in the Mythology of Wagner’s Ring
Thus Stroumsa (Hidden Wisdom, 1996) has
Operas and Parsifal, Waldorf Press, 1974.
described the process by which the Fathers of the
2nd-3rd century shifted the meaning of mustérion
JOSCELYN GODWIN
from the hidden to the ineffable. He concludes that,
in view of the universality claimed by the Christian
Mysticism salvation and the competition with > Gnosticism,
the Fathers suppressed any properly esoteric
‘Like the sphinx of old, mysticism remains the dimension of orthodox Christianity in order to
point where one meets with an enigma. It can be develop, with the aid of esoteric vocabulary, mysti-
located but it cannot be categorized’ (De Certeau cal doctrines bearing on the ineffability of God and
1977). This is doubtless one reason why the term is human interiority.
so ambiguous, and so often lends itself to confusion Other researchers, perhaps as a result of the dis-
with other forms of apprehending reality, such as > credit cast upon the study of esotericism in main-
esotericism. stream academic research, contributed to the
Etymologically, the semantic field of mysticism is confusion by qualifying as “mysticism” domains
close to that of esotericism: mu refers to the closed that would seem to fall, rather, within the province
mouth, hence 76, to be closed (especially the eyes of esotericism. Thus Gershom Scholem, in the Eng-
and the mouth); mustés means the “mystes”, the lish editions of his works, and especially after
initiated one, he who keeps his lips sealed; 1941, used the term mysticism for what he had for-
mustérion refers to the initiation cult, hence > merly been ready to refer to by Hebrew terms
secrecy. In Christianity this vocabulary covers, on equivalent to “esotericism”. Charles Mopsik has
the one hand, the manifestation of the divine plan criticized Scholem for having made the expression
of salvation in Jesus Christ, beyond what can be “Jewish mysticism” an equivalent of “Kabbalah”;
discovered by natural knowledge, but revealed by to the latter, he argues, the word “mystagogy”
mystical and allegorical interpretation; and on the would be more appropriate, since its etymology
other hand, it refers to religious and liturgical ele- ‘simultaneously evokes the idea of secrecy and that
ments, especially of a sacramental order. The Latins of teaching or initiation’ as well as transformative
rendered mustérion as mysterium as well as sacra- wisdom (Mopsik 1993, 24-25). Similarly, when
mentum, which was considered equivalent; the lat- Hans Lewy gives his Chaldaean Oracles and
ter term is of juridical origin (deposit of guarantee Theurgy (1978) the subtitle Mysticism, Magic and
in a trial; oath) and refers less to the pagan mystery Platonism in the Later Roman Empire, Pierre
cults than is the case with mustérion, especially in its Hadot remarks that ‘the word “mysticism” is a
plural mustéria (or, in Latin, mysteria). The adjec- badly defined term that is mostly used haphaz-
tive mustikos thus related first to the initiate and to ardly’ (1978, 718). Its use in the context of > Neo-
mystery, and to the communion of the faithful with platonism connects it with theurgy and the ancient
Christ, prior to becoming a substantive at the turn mysteries, and not with the unitive experience of
of the 16th to the 17th century, designating a unitive the divine that has later come to be attached to it.
experience of the intimate presence of God in Man It therefore seems that, in many cases, the use of the

--- Page 243 ---
819 MYSTICISM
word “mysticism” to designate esoteric trends relative passivity of the mystical path is assumed in a
reflects a strategy of avoiding the pejorative associ- process actively realized by Christ, and second, that
ations attached to the term esotericism. This strat- by virtue of the hypostatic union, mystical union
egy is made possible by the polysemy of the term with Christ is in fact union with divine nature.
musteérion and its derivatives developed in the Any study of the relationships and differences
course of their history, and by the vagueness that is between esotericism and mysticism is certainly
attached to it today. made particularly difficult by the confusion that
Some modern esotericists, most often Christian, reigns between these two areas, and that seems to
have not hesitated to identify themselves with mys- be more or less consciously maintained. This con-
ticism. Examples are > Paul Sédir (Yvon Le Loup) fusion results from a number of factors: their com-
and Louis Charbonneau-Lassay, who generally mon experiential nature; their related semantic
avoids speaking of esotericism, preferring terms connotations; their frequent historical interfer-
like -* hermetism and Christian mysticism. It is ences; a similar independence claimed in relation to
especially true of > Valentin Tomberg, who saw in scholastic theology and ecclesiastical institutions;
mysticism a basic element of hermeticism and the suspicion of heterodoxy associated with it in
distinguished three forms in it according to the many modern theologians; and the discredit that
union that each one is considered to make possible: rationalist thinking has long cast on both. To this
with Nature, with the transcendental human whole set of factors must be added the complex
Self, and with a living God. However, esotericists relation, not only between mysticism and esoteri-
as well as historians of esotericism have sought to cism, but also between these two notions and those
differentiate mysticism from esotericism. Thus, of > magic and theurgy. Esotericism and mysticism
among the latter, Antoine Faivre, while recognizing do have similarities: the primacy of experience and
that the terms esotericism and mysticism are often inner transformation, the quest for unity, and the
used interchangeably, proposes to distinguish these claim that the very heart of religion will be revealed
areas according to the relative importance that only by going beyond rational discursivity. How-
their representatives attach to “intermediary reali- ever, the two notions do not come down to the same
ties”: a domain where the esotericist tend to linger, thing. Even when, especially from the 17th century
whereas it is a mere stage to pass through and leave on, mysticism tends to translate its inexpressible
behind for the mystic (Faivre 1996, 28). dimension into psychological and corporeal phe-
On the side of the esotericists themselves, the tra- nomena, almost like a sort of stigmata through
ditionalists in the wake of > René Guénon oppose which the invisible intrudes into the field of observa-
the initiatory path, seen as properly esoteric, to the tion, it still maintains the demand for a total union
mystical path; they emphasize that the etymology with the divine. In such total union, all intermedi-
connecting mysticism with mystery is no counter- aries and phenomena disappear: the body of the
argument, since mysticism has long designated an modern mystic is a body of pain, subject to a “road
exclusively religious and therefore exoteric path, of excess” that disfigures and annihilates rather than
which is consequently incompatible with the initia- transfigures it. The esotericist, on the other hand,
tory path of esotericism. While mysticism takes an typically awaits the transmutation of the world and
attitude of passivity and receptivity to divine of his own carnal reality; he prefers to sojourn ‘on
influences, whatever they may be, without any doc- Jacob’s ladder, where the angels — symbols, media-
trinal preparation being required, initiation is a tions — are ascending and descending, rather than
methodical activity that requires the individual’s venture resolutely beyond” (Faivre 1996, 28).
initiative from the very beginning. Besides, mysti-
Lit.: Jean Borella, Esotérisme guénonien et mystérecism is confined to the realization of the individual,
chrétien, Lausanne: LAge d’homme_ (Delphica),
whereas initiation can go beyond, at least in some
1997 @ Louis Bouyer, “Mystique: Essai sur l’histoire
cases. > Frithjof Schuon sometimes lets it be under- dun mot”, Supplément de la Vie spirituelle 9 (1949),
stood that the mystical path does include a certain 3-23 Michel de Certeau, La fable mystique, X VI°-
amount of activity and can sometimes anticipate a XVII* siécle (Bibliothéque des histoires), Paris: Galli-
real union with the divine principle, but he never- mard, 1982 @ idem, “Mystique”, in: Encyclopaedia
theless maintains a certain distinction between vol- universalis, vol. 11, Paris: Encyclopaedia universalis,
1977, 521-526 Antoine Faivre, Acces de l’ésotérisme
untaristic mysticism and intellective gnosis. In an
occidental, vol. 2, Paris: Gallimard, 1996 ¢ Pierre
approach to the “Christian mystery” that includes Hadot, “Bilan et perspectives sur les Oracles chal-
the “esoteric perspective”, Jean Borella has sought daiques”, in: Hans Lewy, Chaldaean Oracles and
to refute the Guénonian critique of mysticism. He Theurgy: Mysticism, Magic and Platonism in the Later
argues that it neglects, first, that the undeniable but Roman Empire, new ed. by Michel Tardieu, Paris:

--- Page 244 ---
MYSTICISM 820
Etudes augustiennes, 1978, 703-720 Jean-Pierre Jos- The Naassenes honoured Man (Anthropos) and
sua, Seul avec Dieu: L’aventure mystique, Paris: Galli- the Son of Man above all other divine beings (V, 6,
mard, 1996, 285 Jean-Pierre Laurant, L’ésotérisme 4-7, 1), which they have in common with other
chrétien en France au XIX® siécle, Lausanne: LAge
Gnostic sects [~ Gnosticism]. In the summary of
d’homme, 1992 # Charles Mopsik, Les grand textes de
his report, Hippolytus explicitly states that both la cabale: Les rites qui font Dieu. Pratiques religieuses
et efficacité théurgique dans la cabale des origines au titles refer to the same divine entity (X, 9, 1), and as
milieu du X VIII siécle, Lagrasse: Verdier, 1993, 18-41 a matter of fact, his main report only speaks about
¢ Guy Gedaliahuh Stroumsa, Hidden Wisdom: Eso- “Man”, who is also called Adamas. He is described
teric Traditions and the Roots of Christian Mysticism, as the androgynous manifestation of the highest
Leiden etc.: E.J. Brill, 1996 # Moritz Bassler & Hilde- God, the intermediary being between the divine
gard Chatellier (eds.), Mystik, Mystizismus und Mo-
realm and the created world. That Man is not the
derne in Deutschland um 1900, Strasbourg: Presses
highest, unknown God becomes apparent from the Universitaires de Strasbourg, 1998 # Joseph Dan, “In
Quest of a Historical Definition of Mysticism: The Con- following Naassene statement: ‘The beginning of
tingental Approach”, in: Dan, Jewish Mysticism vol. 3, perfection is the knowledge of Man, but the knowl-
Northvale, NJ: Jason Aroson, 1999 ¢ idem, “Christian edge of God is complete perfection’ (V, 6, 6). The
Kabbalah: From Mysticism to Esotericism”, in: idem, ontological and cosmological structure of the uni-
117-130 @ Dan Merkur, Gnosis: An Esoteric Tradition
verse is rather unexpectedly introduced in V, 7, 9,
of Mystical Visions and Unions, Albany: SUNY Press,
which mentions three eternal principles: the Pre-
1993 @ Dan Merkur, Mystical Moments and Unitive
Thinking, Albany: SUNY Press, 1999. existent, the Self-originate and Outpoured Chaos.
It seems that the Self-originate and the Heavenly
Anthropos are identical, and that he is called
JEROME ROUSSE-LACORDAIRE
“Man” when envisaged as directed to the Pre-exis-
tent One and “Son of Man” as turned to the world
Naassenes of matter (Lancellotti, 2000). The whole universe
has a tripartite structure. Heavenly Man consists of
The Naassenes were adherents of a 2nd-century a rational, a psychic and a material part, which
Gnostic sect that is only known through an exten- together came down on ‘one man, Jesus, the son of
sive report by Hippolytus, Refutatio, V, 6-11. The Mary’. Through these three elements Jesus spoke
greater part of this report consists of an extract to the three classes of being and the three commu-
from a Naassene document, which is usually called nities (“churches”) in the universe, the angelic, the
the “Naassene Sermon” (V, 7, 2-9, 9). It is preceded psychic and the earthly, which are respectively
by an introduction (V, 6, 1-7, 1) and followed by a named the “chosen”, the “called” and the “en-
concluding section (V, 9, 10-11, 1), in which Hip- slaved”. According to Hippolytus, these ideas were
polytus provides further information about their the principal points of a great number of teachings
beliefs. The whole section is part of Hippolytus’ so- that Mariamne would have received from James,
called “Sondergut”, which is, inter alia, character- the Brother of the Lord (V, 7, 1; a late reflection of
ized by the ascription of similar ideas and images to this tradition is found in the apocryphal Acts of
different Gnostic groups. This complicates the Philip, 94{f., where James and Mariamne together
study of the Naassenes to a certain extent, but a go to the land of the Ophites).
more complicating factor is that the author of the The basic idea of their whole system is that of
Sermon wrote for initiates and, for that reason, Adamas, the celestial Anthropos, of whom Scrip-
took knowledge of the Naassene doctrines and rit- ture says: “Who shall declare his generation?’ (Isa-
uals for granted. iah 53:8; V, 7, 2). The Naassene “Sermon”, which
The name “Naassenes” derives from the Hebrew then follows, is in fact no more than an extensive
word nabds, “serpent”, which the Naassenes, like answer to this question. It is not a sermon in the
other Gnostic groups, venerated (V, 6, 3; 11, usual sense of the word and its ideas cannot be
11-12), though it does not play a role of any impor- taken as the shared beliefs of a group. It is a learned
tance in the Naassene ideas described by Hippoly- Gnostic treatise by an individual, who seeks to
tus. There is no discernible relationship between the illustrate the meaning of the Anthropos and other
Naassenes and the Ophites, the other Gnostic Naassene tenets by a wealth of “parallels” from
sect that explicitly derived its name from the serpent Greek and Oriental religions, which he finds cor-
(Greek: ophis) they worshipped. The Naassenes roborated by a great number of biblical texts. The
called themselves “Gnostics”, because they claimed Sermon is largely a Gnostic commentary on two
to be ‘the only ones who knew the depths’, i.e. of hymns to Attis, the emasculated young god of the
God (cf. 1 Cor. 2, 10) or of Wisdom (V, 6, 4). mysteries of the Great Mother, which are quoted in

--- Page 245 ---
821 NAASSENES
full at the end of the treatise. The first of these and he then identifies it with the river that comes
hymns equates Attis with, inter alia, the deities of out of Eden (Gen. 2, roff.). This river in its turn is
the “mysteries” of Syria (Adonis), Egypt (Isis), an image of both earthly man and the heavenly
Samothrace (Adamas), and Greece (the moon god Anthropos, who is also equated with the water
Men, Eleusis). All these deities and the rites con- above the firmament mentioned by Jesus in John 4,
nected with their cults and also the many epithets ro and 14 (V, 9, 13-22). The Naassenes said that
of Attis, mentioned in the first hymn, are applied to they were ‘the spiritual people (pneumatikoi), who
the myth of the Naassene Anthropos. There are no were chosen as his own possession by this “Living
compelling arguments to distinguish, with Frickel Water” on high . . . for we enter in through the true
and other scholars, several layers of successive revi- gate, which is Jesus the blessed one, and out of all
sions in the document and to assume that the men we alone are Christians’ (V, 9, 21-22).
author has adapted an already existing “pagan” At the end of his report, Hippolytus quotes a
commentary on the Attis hymns to his Naassene Gnostic hymn, ‘through which they suppose they
beliefs. The author was most probably a Gnostic are celebrating all the mysteries of their error’. This
teacher who had a good knowledge of Greek and hymn, the famous Psalm of the Naassenes, starts
Oriental religious traditions, but also of both the with a reference to the three basic principles of the
Old and the New Testament. universe, here called “First-born Mind (nous)”,
His discussion of the pagan “parallels” reveals “Outpoured Chaos”, and “Soul (psyché)”. They
some interesting aspects of the Naassene ideas are probably identical to the principles mentioned
on anthropology and soteriology. The heavenly in the Sermon: the Pre-existent One, Outpoured
Anthropos (Adamas) is the prototype of which Chaos, and the Self-originate as the intermediary
earthly man (Adam) is the image. The exact rela- divine entity between the two extremes. Thereupon
tionship between them is difficult to establish: on the hymn continues with the fate of the Soul, which
the one hand, the Son of Man, as the creative force finally ‘in her wanderings entered the exitless
in the universe, gives life to the human mould, on Labyrinth’, i.e. the world of matter and evil. Then
the other hand he is captured by the evil powers Jesus, who as the Saviour is apparently identified
and enslaved in the human body. The Naassenes with the heavenly Anthropos, takes action to save
considered this an inexplicable mystery: ‘How and the soul. It is worthwhile to quote the rest of the
in what way he came down, we do not know’ (V, 8, Psalm in conclusion, since it is a beautiful expres-
13). It is clear that somehow the soul constitutes sion of the Gnostic idea of salvation, not only of the
the link between the divine prototype and its Naassenes, but also of the Gnostics in general
earthly image. The souls, at least those which (Marcovich, 1978): ‘Then Jesus said: “Look,
become enlightened or “reawakened”, come from Father:/this prey to evils is wandering away to
‘that blessed being on high, Man or Primal Man or earth,/far from thy spirit./And she seeks to escape
Adamas, from whom they were brought down into the bitter Chaos,/but knows not how to win
this moulded figure of clay to serve the artificer of through./For that reason send me, Father./Bearing
this creation, Esaldaeus, the fiery god, the fourth in the seals I will descend;/I will pass through all the
number’ (V, 7, 30). Esaldaeus is the Demiurge, Aeons;/I will reveal all the mysteries/and show the
whose name is a Greek form of the biblical divine forms of the gods:/I will transmit the secrets of the
name El-Shaddai (probably “God of the moun- holy way,/calling them Gnosis”’.
tain”). He might have been called “the Fourth”,
since he brought order in the “outpoured chaos”, M. Marcovich (ed.), Hippolytus: Refutatio omnium
the third eternal principle of the universe, and rules haeresium (PTS, 25), Berlin-New York: De Gruyter,
1986; Engl. trans. (after the German translation by
over it together with his powers (Lancellotti, 2000,
W. Foerster): W. Foerster (ed.), Gnosis: A Selection
115-120). As said above, the three aspects of the of Gnostic Texts, English Translation edited by
heavenly Man came down on Jesus, who became R. McL. Wilson, 1, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972,
the Gnostic Saviour by revealing the truth to those 261-282.
who are worthy of it. The cosmology and soteriol-
ogy are in fact aspects of one process of descent and Lit.: M.J. Edwards, “The Naming of the Naassenes:
Hippolytus, Refutatio V.6-10 as hieros logos”, Zeit-return of both the divine Anthropos and human
schrift fiir Papyrologie und Epigraphik 112 (1996),
souls. This process is compared to an ocean,
74-80 ¢« J. Frickel, Hellenistische Erldsung in
‘always turning in its ebb and flow, now upwards, christlicher Deutung: Die gnostische Naassenerschrift:
now downwards’ (V, 7, 38). In one of his few ref- Ouellenkritische Studien, Strukturanalyse, Schichten-
erences to the serpent, the author says that it is the scheidung, Rekonstruktion der Anthropos-Lehrschrift
liquid substance, without which nothing can exist, (NHS, 19), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1984 J. Holzhausen,

--- Page 246 ---
NAASSENES 822
Der “Mythos vom Menschen” im hellenistischen ing from the increasing amount of scientific discov-
Agypten (Theophaneia, 33), Bodenheim: Athenaum eries. It was a matter of resacralizing both science
Hain Hanstein, 1994 # M.G. Lancellotti, The and the world. Theosophy stricto sensu starts from
Naassenes: A Gnostic Identity Among Judaism, Chris-
a speculation which bears on the Divine, whereas
tianity, Classical and Ancient Near Ancient Traditions
Naturphilosophie proper begins with an observa- (Forschungen zur Anthropologie und Religions-
geschichte, 35), Minster, 2000 ¢ idem, Attis Between tion of natural phenomena, which it then tries to
Myth and History: King, Priest and God (Religions in integrate into a holistic and spiritual worldview.
the Graeco-Roman World, 149), Leiden: E.J. Brill, But since theosophers often transferred to the Spirit
2002, 119-125 ¢ M. Marcovich, “The Naassene Psalm or the Divine Itself the proprieties of physics, it is
in Hippolytus (Haer. 5.10.1)”, in: B. Layton (ed.), The scarcely surprising that in some authors the dis-
Rediscovery of Gnosticism: Proceedings of the Inter-
tinction between Naturphilosophie and Theoso-
national Conference on Gnosticism at Yale New
Haven, Connecticut, March 28-31, 1978, vol. Il, phy tends to get blurred (see below).
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1981, 770-778 ¢ H.-M. Schenke, “Mosaic physics” also flourished in the 17th cen-
Der Gott “Mensch” in der Gnosis: Ein religions- tury. The term physica sacra, often linked to it,
geschichtlicher Beitrag zur Diskussion tiber die paulin- served to designate a reading of the Bible consid-
ische Anschauung von der Kirche als Leib Christi, ered as the key to understanding another Book,
Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1962.
that of Nature. The contents of both Books were
supposed to coincide. Jan Amos Comenius, for
ROELOF VAN DEN BROEK instance, represents this tendency. In the pre-
Enlightenment era, at the end of the 17th century,
Naturphilosophie (end 18th-first half of first in England, then in other European countries,
19th century) there arose a certain physico-theology, which en-
deavoured to reconcile scientific discoveries with
Not to be confused with “natural philosophy”, faith (not necessarily with the Bible) as a reaction
considered as the pursuit of an objective knowl- to mechanistic worldviews and Cartesian rational-
edge of phenomena, several “philosophies of ism. Physico-theologians (for example, Friedrich
nature” have adopted a more intuitive approach, Christian Lesser, Lithotheologie, 173 5) were lavish
as followed by thinkers like Gottfried W. Leibniz, in descriptions of animals (bees, molluscs, spiders,
Georg W.F. Hegel or Henri Bergson, but also by birds, etc.), plants, and natural phenomena (light-
those who represent the specific current called ning, storms), to which they attributed symbolic
Naturphilosophie, which belongs to the Romantic and spiritual, albeit generally static, meanings.
period [~ Romanticism] lato sensu (end of the 18th In the context of the later widespread craze for
century and first half of the rg9th), particularly in experimentation with electricity and galvanism
Germany. (1789, experiments of Galvani; 1800, Voltaic pile),
Among the precursors of Naturphilosophie are, the pre-Romantic period witnessed the spread of
in particular, > Christian Theosophy, “mosaic Franz Anton Mesmer’s theories, and the develop-
physics”, “physico-theology”, the so-called “theol- ment of animal magnetism by Armand Marie de
ogy of electricity”, the first experiments in > ani- Puységur and his followers. Another result of the
mal magnetism; and also three new orientations belief in a magnetic fluid pervading Man and the
which appeared toward the end of the 18th century whole universe was the so-called “theology of elec-
on the stage of philosophy in general, and will be tricity”. The latter was marked by a kind of spiri-
further explained below. tual realism represented by the theosopher >
To begin with Christian Theosophy, an esoteric Friedrich Christoph Oetinger and other figures like
current which flourished from the beginning of the Prokop Divisch, Johann Ludwig Fricker, Gottlieb
17th century onward, one of its prevailing aspects Friedrich Résler (e.g. their book Theorie der mete-
was the search for dynamic > correspondences orologischen Elektrizitat, 1765). This “theology”
between Nature, Man and God (or divine entities) may be considered, at least with regard to Oetinger,
through an ongoing, “illuminative” speculation as a kind of proto-Naturphilosophie.
bearing on the complex and dramatic relationships Besides these three precursors, three further fac-
between these three, envisaged as dramatis per- tors pertaining to the history of philosophy proper
sonae. In the 18th century, theosophical discourses are also relevant to the appearance of Natur-
dealt more and more with the notion of “higher philosophie.
physics”, or “sacred physics”, as opposed to a A) The influence of French naturalism. With
merely rational variety. Such sacred physics Georges-Louis de Buffon’s theoretical works and
opposed the desacralization of the universe result- Denis Diderot’s Le réve de d’Alembert (1769), a

--- Page 247 ---
823 NATURPHILOSOPHIE
new way of considering physics had begun to than Schelling, Eschenmayer combined the data of
emerge. It began asa kind of literary exercise rather the pansophic-esoteric legacy with the new spirit of
than a strictly scientific discourse, but as it became Kantian philosophy.
more popular it pervaded the culture of the time. Among the further representatives of Naturphi-
Buffon, in particular, fostered a taste for synthesis losophie, the following authors and their repre-
(typical of Romantic thought), and promoted the sentative works stand out: Karl Friedrich Burdach
theme of the Soul of the World (anima mundi). (Blicke ins Leben |Glimpses into Life], 1842-
B) The philosophies of Imanuel Kant and 1848); Wilhelm Butte (Arithmetik des mensch-
Johann Gottlieb Fichte. In Metaphysische Anfangs- lichen Lebens |Arithmetic of Human Life], 1811);
griinde der Naturwissenschaft (Metaphysical Foun- Carl Gustav Carus (Natur und Idee, 1862); Joseph
dations of Natural Science, 1786), which discussed Ennemoser (Der Magnetismus im Verhdltnis zur
the necessity of discovering the a priori principles Natur und Religion |Magnetism as related to
at work behind empirical data, Kant presented as a Nature and Religion], 1842); Gustav Theodor
constitutive characteristic of Nature the two forces Fechner (Zend-Avesta, 1851), Joseph Gorres
of Newtonian physics, attraction and repulsion, at (Aphorismen uber Kunst, als Einleitung zu kiinfti-
a time when the notion of polarity was already gen Aphorismen tiber Organonomie, Physik, Psy-
spreading outside esoteric circles and flowing into chologie und Anthropologie |Aphorisms on Art, as
various domains including medicine. Leaning on an Introduction to Future Aphorisms on Organon-
some of Kant’s ideas, which he extended to the omy, Physics, Psychology and Anthropology],
utmost, Fichte proceeded to spread the idea that 1802); > Justinus Kerner (Eine Erscheinung aus
the world is a product of > Imagination (notably dem Nachtgebiete der Natur [A Manifestation
in Grundlage der gesamten Wissenschaftslehre from the Night-Side of Nature], 1836); Dietrich
[Foundations of the Entire Doctrine of Science, Georg Kieser (in particular his contributions of the
1794-1795]). Imagination was understood as re- 1820s to the journal Archiv fur den Thierischen
sulting from a synthetic and spontaneous activity Magnetismus); Giovanni Malfatti (Studien tuber
of the Spirit (7.e., the thing in itself and our repre- Anarchie und Hierarchie des Wissens [Studies
sentation of it are identical). about Anarchy and Hierarchy of Knowledge],
c) Spinozan philosophy. Having been considered 1843); ~ Johann Friedrich von Meyer (in particu-
an atheist during most of the 18th century, Spi- lar his contributions to Blatter fiir hohere Wahrheit
noza’s religious ideas returned to centre stage at the [Journal for Higher Truth], 1820, 1823, 1827,
turn of the century, but were now interpreted as 1832); Adam Miller (Lehre vom Gegensatz [The
those of a man intoxicated with God. His “Deus Contradiction Theory], 1804); > Novalis (ps. of
sive natura” was no longer read as a disguised pro- Friedrich von Hardenberg: Das allgemeine Brouil-
fession of materialistic faith, but as the affirmation lon: Materialien zur Enzyklopddistik [The General
that Nature is something divine. At this time, there Draft: Materials for my Encyclopaedic Project],
was a prevailing tendency to conceive of God not 1798-1799); Hans Christian Oersted (Der Geist
as identical with things but as the primordial cen- der Natur [The Spirit of Nature], 1850-1851);
tre of energy from which the development of Lorenz Oken (Lehrbuch der Naturphilosophie
organic forms and the entire finite world pro- [Coursebook on Naturphilosophie], 1809); >
ceeded. Naturphilosophie generally avoids panthe- Johann Wilhelm Ritter (Fragmente aus der Nach-
ism in favour of this panentheism. lasse eines jungen Physikers [Fragments from the
Naturphilosophie proper appeared during the Legacy of a Young Physicist], 1810); the painter
last years of the 18th century, heralded by two Philipp Otto Runge (Farbenkugel [Ball of
groundbreaking works, published almost simulta- Colours], 1810); > Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert
neously in 1798: > EJ.W. Schelling’s Von der Welt- (Ansichten tiber die Nachtseite der Naturwis-
seele (On the Soul of the World), and > Franz von senschaft [Views on the Night Sides of the Science
Baader’s Uber das pythagordische Quadrat in der of Nature], 1808); Henrik Steffens (Grundziige der
Natur (About the Pythagorean Square in Nature). philosophischen Naturwissenschaften (The Main
Besides these two, mention must be made of the Traits of the Philosophical Science of Nature],
first writings of the theoretician in animal magnet- 1806); Gottfried Reinhold Trevisarus (Die Erschei-
ism Carl August von Eschenmayer (e.g., Sdtze aus nungen und Gesetze des organischenn Lebens
der Naturmetaphysik auf chemiche und medicini- [The Manifestations and Laws of Organic Life],
sche Gegenstdande angewandt [Elements of Meta- 1831-1833); Ignaz Troxler (Uber das Leben und
physics of Nature, applied to chemical and medical sein Problem [On Life and Its Problem], 1806);
objects], 1797). Along with Baader, and even more Johann Jakob Wagner (Organon der menschlichen

--- Page 248 ---
NATURPHILOSOPHIE 824
Erkenntniss [Organon of Human Knowledge], Nature and Spirit ..., the more perfect you will
1830). One should also mention, with respect to find it and [the more you will see that] these two
other cultural fields, such names as > Louis-Claude Natures are the seeds of one common root’ (Be-
de Saint-Martin (L’Esprit des choses |The Spirit of trachtungen iiber die Geschichte der Chemie |Con-
Things], 1802), William Paley (Natural Theology, siderations on the History of Chemistry], 1807).
1802), or Sir Humphrey Davy (Consolations in This “philosophy of identity” (viz. Schelling) has
Travel, 1830). remained the most suggestive idea of Natur-
The theosophical tendency is far from being the philosophie, because it bears on the perennial
rule amongst these figures. It is conspicuous in metaphysical question of the relationship between
Baader, Meyer, and Schubert, for example, but Nature and Spirit. By the same token, self-knowl-
almost absent from the works of such authors as edge and knowledge of the world go hand in hand.
Burdach, Oken, and Wagner. However most Both are an initiatory journey and immersion into
Naturphilosophen share three common tenets, “the becoming” (das Werden). But this Werden is
which are explicitly or implicitly present in their dramatic because it implies both order and disor-
discourse, and account for their proximity to eso- der. The world that surrounds us, and we ourselves,
tericism in general, and to theosophy in particular: bear witness to an ancient order which has been
First tenet: Nature has a history of a mythical disrupted. The idea is conspicuous also in Roman-
order. This ontological postulate functions as a tic art and literature, which lavishly depict natural
poetic mainspring for research and speculation. landscapes resulting from cataclysmic events, thus
The world is not made of eternal, immutable things reflecting one of the essential themes developed by
but is, like the Spirit, engaged in a process of a theosophy, namely the belief in an original Fall
highly dramatic character. A quadruple polar of Man and Nature. The interdependence of Man
structure underlies most of these speculations. The and Nature, including the entire cosmos and the
first pole is the undifferentiated chaos, or primor- Soul of the World, is the central idea underlying the
dial light. From it, two opposite poles emerge, researches of such Naturphilosophen as Baader,
which are both opposed and complementary to one Schubert, and Kerner in mesmerism, animal mag-
another and assume various forms, like Fire and netism, and dreams.
Water, Fire and Light, Masculine and Feminine, Third tenet: Nature as a whole is a living net of
Attraction and Repulsion. A fourth term then man- correspondences to be deciphered and integrated
ifests, which reflects the first one and is the com- into a holistic worldview. Nature is to be read as a
mon product within which the two opposing terms text replete with symbolic implications, whose
combine. Such a quaternary is the basic structure meaning lies beyond herself. A Spirit speaks
from which emerges a mythical narrative, iden- through her. As a consequence, rigorous experi-
tified by Schelling as ‘the repressed mystery of mental science is never more than an obligatory
Christianity’. It is the story of the “Redeemed first step toward a comprehensive, holistic knowl-
Redeemer”, i.e., the meta-history of a captive Light edge encompassing both natura naturans and
awakened by another Light that had remained free. natura naturata (i.e., the invisible as well as the vis-
Hence the frequent use of the two notions of light ible processes at work within Nature and the whole
and gravity (rather than darkness), the latter being cosmos). Things always present themselves as sym-
understood as something by which the primitive bols which lead back to both the warp and woof of
energies have been engulfed, but from which they a universal web. Living structures are detected in
are still likely to re-emerge. In a similar vein, > crystals, celestial constellations, and electrical phe-
Jacob Boehme described Nature as a fire whose nomena. Mechanistic imaginary and the compart-
embers Man should rekindle and which in turn mentalization of science into sectors cut off from
would redeem him. one another, are replaced by an organic merging of
Second tenet: The identity of Spirit and Nature, all disciplines. Thus concrete science and meta-
first expressed by Schelling. “Spirit” is understood physics, or experimentation and meditation, are
as the universal, even divine One, in His relation to two sides of the same coin. Almost all representa-
Nature and Man. Ontologically, this identity rests tives of this current were scholars with at least one
on a mythical conception of the history of Nature scientific specialty, like chemistry, physics, geology,
(see above), based on an epistemological plane mine engineering, or medicine. The fragments of
where the negative or destructive opposition of the empirical reality required a “second reading”.
two is surmounted: Spirit becomes Nature, Nature Once reality had been subjected to scientific analy-
becomes spiritualized. Oersted wrote, ‘The more sis, it needed to be deciphered symbolically in order
you advance toward [the] agreement between to yield clusters of meaning. Consequently, a sci-

--- Page 249 ---
825 NATURPHILOSOPHIE
entific fact is perceived as a sign; and signs respond imprint upon the teachings and literature of the
to each other. Concepts borrowed from chemistry Anthroposophical Society [> Anthroposophy]
are transferred to astronomy or human psychol- until the present. Less directly but more impor-
ogy; notions pertaining to botany are used to tantly, the most obvious survival of Naturphilo-
describe inorganic processes, and vice versa. It is sophie is to be found in the theories of the
not surprising that the Romantic image of the wise unconscious. In this respect, works like Schubert’s
physician, characteristic of period literature, Die Symbolik des Traums (Symbolism of Dreams,
enjoyed a great success, based as it was on the anal- 1814), and perhaps even more Carus’s Psyche:
ogy between medicine and poetry. In literature, Entwicklungsgeschichte der Seele (Psyche: The
such transfers from one domain to another often Developmental History of the Soul, 1846), cer-
took the form of aphorisms (e.g. Novalis), a genre tainly influenced the ideas of late 19th century
generally favoured by German Romanticism. The thinkers like Eduard von Hartmann (Philosophie
Romantic writer Friedrich Schlegel claimed that des Unbewussten [Philosophy of the Unconscious],
‘the combinatorial mind is truly prophetic’, and 1869). Even more importantly, these theorists of
Schelling advocated a form of non-dogmatic poly- the unconscious represent the historical origins of
theism: ‘Monotheism of the mind and of the heart, psychoanalysis, leading to the theories of Sigmund
and polytheism of the imagination and of art, this Freud (for whom the unconscious is monolithic, as
is what we need’ (Briefe und Dokumente, 1962, it had been for Arthur Schopenhauer) and those of
vol. I, 70). > Carl Gustav Jung, who described the uncon-
~ Goethe’s philosophy of Nature is somewhat scious as a dynamically functioning quaternary.
distinct from the current of Naturphilosophie. Jung may be considered the last major representa-
Admittedly, throughout his life he certainly main- tive of Naturphilosophie. His view of > alchemy,
tained the notion of a vital universe, and his namely that what alchemists saw in their crucible
scientific works, especially those on the meta- was a constellation of their own unconscious,
morphosis of plants and on colours, place him might well be applied to the Naturphilosophen as
close to some leanings of the Naturphilosophen. well. Apart from brilliant exceptions like Ritter
But he was more interested in trying to grasp eter- and Oersted, the Naturphilosophen did not make
nity in an instant, or infinity in an object (> significant discoveries themselves; but they were
William Blake), than in discovering commonalities keen to find and express truths of a different order,
or correspondences between things, or in what the that of the Absolute.
latter symbolize of the invisible. More generally, he Over the last decades, members of several sci-
remained aloof from Romanticism. entific communities have adopted some concep-
After about sixty years, the current of Natur- tions pertaining to Naturphilosophie, whether they
philosophie faded away in the 1850s. It was prob- were aware of this tradition or not. For example,
ably the last period in which Man - or, at least, the the idea of intelligent matter has been addressed by
savants — had felt at home on Earth. Gradually, an scientists like Valdemar Axel Firsoff (Life, Mind
estrangement of Man from Nature had made head- and Galaxies, 1967) and Jean Charon (L’Homme
way. This process had already been smouldering et Univers [Man and the Universe], 1974). The
for a few decades, as exemplified by Arthur hypothesis that matter is modelled on the Spirit has
Schopenhauer’s Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung been developed in Arthur Koestler’s The Roots of
(The World as Will and Representation, 1819), in Coincidence (1972). Authors like David Bohm
which Nature is considered as being outside the (Wholeness and the Implicate Order, 1980) and
categories of understanding. In the second half of Fritjof Capra (The Tao of Physics, 1975) have
the roth century, Naturphilosophie was definitely developed “holistic” interpretations of modern
superseded by the advent of scientistic, materialis- physics, thus fostering a sort of visionary physics
tic worldviews. However, it left numerous legacies. that can be interpreted as a new form of Natur-
A number of celebrated philosophers in the zoth philosophie (Hanegraaff 1996/1998, 64-76).
century, like Ludwig Klages, Hermann Keyserling,
and Max Scheler, have reclaimed some of its her- Lit.: (General works only) Roger Ayrault, La Genése
itage, but in an essentially speculative manner, du Romantisme allemand, Paris: Aubier-Montaigne,
1964, vol. 4, 13-167 # Ernst Benz, Theologie der Elek-
since none of them was a chemist, astrophysicist, or
trizitat: Zur Begegnung und Auseinandersetzung von
physician. Theologie und Naturwissenschaft im 17ten und 18ten
Originally inspired by Goethe, > Rudolf Steiner Jahrhundert, Mainz: Akademie der Wissenschaft und
then followed an orientation more akin to Natur- der Literatur, 1970 # Christoph Bernoulli & Hans
philosophie proper, which has consequently left its Kern (ed.), Romantische Naturphilosophie, Jena:

--- Page 250 ---
NATURPHILOSOPHIE 826
Diederichs, 1926 Richard Brinkmann (ed.), Roman- and the Grail have no mutual relation whatso-
tik in Deutschland: Ein interdisziplinares Symposium, ever. The alleged connection was popularized
Stuttgart: Metzler, 1978, 167-330 (Section “Romantik by Richard Wagner (1813-1883) in his Parsifal
im Spannungsfeld von Naturgefiihl, Naturwissen-
(1882), and actually taken for granted by genera-
schaft und Philosophie”) ¢ Dietrich von Engelhardt,
tions of artists and poets. “Romantische Naturforschung”, in: Dietrich von
Engelhardt, Historisches Bewusstsein in der Naturwis- It was Jules-Benoit Doinel (1842-1902) who first
senschaft von der Aufklarung bis zum Positivismus, revived Catharism as a living religious faith. Born
Freiburg in Br.: Reineck, 1979, 103-157 ¢ idem, “Bib- into a pious Catholic family in Moulins (France) in
liographie der Sekundarliteratur zur romantischen 1842, as a teenager Doinel experienced mystical
Naturforschung und Medizin 1950-1975”, in: Richard visions of St. Stanislas Kostka (1550-1568), a 16th
Brinkmann (ed), Romantik in Deutschland: Ein inter-
century Jesuit novice celebrated for his chastity.
disziplinares Symposium, Stuttgart: Metzler, 1978,
307-330 @ Antoine Faivre, Philosophie de la Nature Doinel dreamed of joining the Jesuits, but the latter
(Physique sacrée et théosophie, XVIII°™°-XLX°”" did not particularly appreciate his visions and mys-
siécles), Paris: Albin Michel, 1998 # Antoine Faivre & ticism. Disappointed, while achieving national
Rolf Christian Zimmermann (ed.), Epochen der prominence as an archivist and student of medieval
Naturmystik: Hermetische Tradition im wissenschaft- documents, he left the Roman Catholic Church
lichen Fortschritt, Berlin: E. Schmidt, 1979 # Alexan-
altogether and became a spiritualist medium
der Gode von Aesch, Natural Science in German
[| Spiritualism]. After a short return to Catholi-
Romanticism, New York: Colombia University Press,
1941 (reprint 1966) ¢ Georges Gusdorf, Le Savoir cism between 1868-1874, he furthermore became
romantique de la Nature (Bibliothéque Scientifique, an anticlerical Freemason [> Freemasonry], a
Les Sciences Humaines et la pensée occidentale XII), Theosophist [-> Theosophical Society], and a Mar-
Paris: Payot, 1985 ¢ Wouter J. Hanegraaff, New Age tinist [> Martinism: Second Period]. In the late
Religion and Western Culture: Esotericism in the Mir- 1880s, Doinel became a regular of the Paris circle
ror of Secular Thought, Leiden, New York, Koln: E.J.
surrounding Maria Mariategui, Duchess of Pomar,
Brill, 1996 & Albany: State University of New York
Lady Caithness by marriage (1830-1895), a key Press, 1998, 64-76 # Werner Leibbrand, Die spekula-
tive Medizin der Romantik, Hamburg: Classen, 1956 figure in the Paris esoteric milieu of the time. In
Sara Stebbins, Maxima in Minimis: Zum Empirie- und May 1890, Doinel and the Duchess founded a
Autoritatsverstandnis in der physico-theologschen secret ~ Gnostic Church. One month later, during
Literatur der Friihaufklarung, Frankfurt/Bern: Peter a famous spiritualist séance in the Duchess’s pri-
Lang, 1980. vate chapel, the spirits of no less than 41 “Cathar
bishops” appeared and consecrated Doinel as
ANTOINE FAIVRE patriarch of a new neo-Cathar Gnostic Church.
Based on this spiritualist consecration Doinel, in
Neo-Catharism turn, proceeded to consecrate as Gnostic bishops
some of the most well-known figures of the Paris’
~ Catharism, the dualistic medieval Christian occult “underground”, including > Papus (Gérard
heresy, disappeared in the early 15th century, and Encausse, 1865-1916) and > Paul Sédir (Yvon Le
was occasionally remembered only by Church Loup, 1871-1926). Doinel also claimed that the
historians until the Enlightenment, when anti- Cathars of old had had women bishops, and thus
Catholic philosophes lionized Cathars as victims of went on to consecrate Marie Chauvel de Chau-
Catholic intolerance. Later, in the r9th century, vigny (1842-1927) as yet another bishop in his
Romantics linked Catharism to the legend of the Gnostic Church, giving her the name of Esclar-
Holy > Grail. In 1846, for instance, historian monde (after the Cathar heroine, 1250-1300).
Charles-Claude Fauriel (1772-1844) interpreted Between 1890-1894, Doinel devised a full religious
the word “Monsalwaesche”, the name of the myth- ritual, drawing on both ancient > Gnosticism and
ical Grail castle in the 13th century Parzival writ- medieval Catharism. He recreated, in particular,
ten by Wolfram von Eschenbach (1170-1220), asa two Cathar sacraments, the “Consolamentum”
German version of Montségur, the Pyrenean and “Appareillantum” (a penitential ritual).
fortress from which the Cathars organized their In 1895, Doinel announced his re-conversion to
last act of resistance in 1244. Fauriel, in his Roman Catholicism, and repudiated his neo-
Histoire de la poésie provengale, argued that Cathar Church by publishing a vitriolic exposé
“Montségur” (Mons Securitatis) had the same of this and other occult activities and rituals under
meaning as “Monsalwaesche”, i.e. “the Mount of the title Lucifer démasqué (Lucifer Unmasked).
Salvation”. Contemporary historians, however, Although the scandal generated by this book even-
have concluded that, strictly speaking, the Cathars tually subsided, it is unclear what Doinel really

--- Page 251 ---
827 NEO-CATHARISM
thought up to his death in 1902: he had attended Dutch-based Rosicrucian organization until his
both Gnostic and Catholic rituals, and had death in 1962, linking the Lectorium to the caves
remained a contradictory and enigmatic figure. and museum in Ussat. While Roché and Gadal did
Doinel’s Gnostic Church continued, and still exists much to revive both local and international interest
today (although divided by several schisms into a in Catharism, they ultimately isolated themselves
dozen different international branches), but the from the larger milieu of Cathar enthusiasts by
Cathar connection largely died with him. each joining a specific movement (Anthroposophy
Quite apart from the Gnostic Church, a Cathar for Roché, and the Lectorium for Gadal).
revival emerged in Southern France (the pays Roché and Gadal’s cause also suffered because of
cathare, “Cathar country” where Cathars once its association with Otto Rahn (1904-1939), an SS
lived and died) in the 1930s around Déodat Roché officer who explored “Cathar country” and the
(1877-1978) and Antonin Gadal (1877-1962). alleged Grail connection in the 1930s, eventually
Their work was largely indebted to the roth cen- publishing two books on the subject. It is unclear
tury writer Napoléon Peyrat (1809-1881). Occa- whether Rahn worked alone, or whether his Grail
sionally regarded as the founder of modern quest was conducted on behalf of the Nazi hierar-
neo-Catharism, Peyrat was a Protestant pastor chy and its Wagnerian aspirations. Nazi interest in
who believed that the real continuation of Cath- Cathar mythology in German-occupied France has
arism was, in fact, Protestantism. Southern French been mentioned not only in popular “esoteric”
neo-Cathar circles gained some audience in Paris, fiction, but also in more reputable literature,
where they also influenced novelist Maurice Magre including the celebrated Avignon Quintet by
(1877-1941), who returned to the Grail connection Lawrence Durrell (1912-1990). Most Catharism
linking it to the legend of a Cathar treasure hidden buffs did not join any specific movement, but
somewhere in the hills of Montségur. Roché did remained secular humanists (in most cases), Protes-
much to promote the mythology of Montségur, tants, and even Roman Catholics, while at the same
where he later built a monument, dedicated in time collecting old Cathar documents and promot-
1959. In 1950, he established the Société des ing tourism to “Cathar country”. The latter activ-
Souvenirs et des Etudes Cathares, and from 1949 ity has met with considerable and unexpected
edited the journal Cahiers d’Etudes Cathares. Both success, and “Cathar country” is now visited
the Society and the journal still exist, and Roché is yearly by millions of tourists. Others, following
still honored in his native village of Arques, Otto Rahn (or the rumors and mythology sur-
although he also had a number of critics unable rounding his visits to Southern France), promoted
to share his enthusiasm for the > Anthroposophy small neo-Cathar groups which are right-wing
of > Rudolf Steiner (1861-1925). In fact, Roché politically as well as religiously, and made
consistently refused to be nicknamed “Pope of Catharism the putative “national religion” of Oc-
(neo-)Catharism”, which was a title liberally con- citania. Some smaller groups are explicitly neo-
ferred on him by the local press, and he remained a Nazi, whilst others promote nationalisme occitan
loyal Anthroposophist throughout most of his life. and Languedoc separatism from France.
Somewhat similar was the itinerary of Antonin Neo-Cathar mythology also played a role in the
Gadal. Born in Tarascon, he worked as a school strange saga of Rennes-le-Chateau, a small village
teacher in Ussat-Ornolac (Ariége) and became a in the Aude department, in the heart of “Cathar
student of the village’s Cathar history. Although country”. In 1885, Berenger Sauniére (1852-1917)
not everybody was persuaded, he himself believed became the parish priest of Rennes-le-Chateau. An
that Cathars had congregated in the caves near amateur historian and archeologist, he recovered a
Ussat, and he arranged for them to be opened to number of artifacts dating back to the Middle Ages
tourists (similarly, Roché “catharized” the graffiti and built a neo-Gothic home and tower for himself
found in some caves near Montségur). Gadal tried next door to the parish church. Conflicts about the
to reconstruct the Cathar religion (which he called ownership of these buildings, and other matters,
“Maneism”, carefully distinguishing it from > led to Sauniére being disciplined by his bishop, and
Manichaeism), and also regarded Cathars as the in 1910 he was suspended from his priestly office.
direct descendants of a French branch of Gnosti- Rumors and legends abounded about the strange
cism. After World War II, Gadal met > Jan van priest, and after his death in 1917 his former maid,
Rijckenborgh (Jan Leene, 1896-1968), the founder Marie Denarnaud (1868-1953), who had inherited
of the Rosicrucian organization Lectorium Rosi- Sauniére’s buildings and was trying to sell them,
crucianum. In 1957, Gadal founded the French claimed that the priest had found an ancient
branch of the Lectorium, and faithfully served the treasure on the site, and had re-hidden it there.

--- Page 252 ---
NEO-CATHARISM 828
Eventually, Denarnaud sold the property to Noel nin) Gadal, Sur le chemin du Saint-Graal, Haarlem:
Corbu (1912-1968), who used it to open a restau- Rozekruis Pers, 1960 # idem, Montréal de Sos., Le
Chateau du Graal, Haarlem: Rozekruis Pers, 1980 ¢rant, and spread the treasure story through the
idem, L’Héritage des Cathares, Le Druidisme, Haar-
local press in the hope of attracting tourists and
lem: Rozekruis Pers, 1994 # Déodat Roché, Le
customers. Corbu was quite successful, precisely Catharisme: Son développement dans le Midi de la
because his claims fell on receptive ears among France, les Croisades contre les albigeois, Carcassonne:
Cathar enthusiasts, who regarded Sauniére as hav- Gabelle, 1937 # Roger Constant & Michel Fidelein,
ing some connection with “the” Cathar treasure. Les nouveaux Cathares, Paris: Le Léopard d’Or,
Pierre Plantard (1920-2000), a well-known 1990 Otto Rahn, Kreuzzug gegen den Gral, Freiburg
in Breisgau: Urban-Verlag, 1933 ¢ idem, Luzifers Hof-
participant in Paris’s occult milieu, also became a
gesind, Leipzig: Schwarzhaupter-Verlag, 1937.
key character in the Rennes-le-Chateau saga. He
claimed that the treasure found by Sauniére Lit.: Jean-Philippe Audouy, Déodat Roché: “Le Tis-
included not only material goods and artifacts, but serand des Catharismes”, C.V.P.M. (Carcassonne/
also documents proving that Jesus had married Arques: Centre de Valorisation du Patrimoine Médié-
Mary Magdalene, and that their children origi- val)/Impressions du Pays Cathare, 1997 ¢ Marie-
nated a royal bloodline which ultimately flowed Claire Viguier, “Otto Rahn entre Lucifer et Jésus”,
Heresis: Revue Semestrielle d’Hérésiologie Médiévale
through the throne of France in the veins of the
18 (June 1992), 55-70 @ Franco Cardini, Massimo
Merovingian dynasty. The Holy Grail, the Saint Introvigne & Marina Montesano, I/ Santo Graal, Flo-
Graal in French, was really the “Sang Réal” (Royal rence: Giunti, 1998 # Hans-Jurgen Lange, Otto Rahn
Blood), the blood ofJesus Christ himself carried by und die Suche nach dem Gral: Biografie und Quellen,
the Merovingians and their descendants. Plantard Engerda: Arun, 1999 # Stephen O’Shea, The Perfect
ultimately claimed to be a true descendant of the Heresy: The Life and Death of the Cathars, London:
Prophile Books, 2000.Merovingians, and that Cathars, Knights Tem-
plars, and a secret society called Priory of Sion,
were all custodians ofJesus’ secret. In fact, a Priory MASSIMO INTROVIGNE
of Sion was legally established by Plantard in 1956
and, even after his death in 2000, it still has mem- Neopaganism
bers in several countries. In the meantime, the idea
that documents proving that Jesus had children TAN TRODUC. LUON 2 ESO1G Acr
by Mary Magdalene are hidden somewhere in ANTECEDENTS 3. WICCA
Rennes-le-Chateau, has been popularized in books 4. FEMINIST WITCHCRAFT
written by both French (Gérard de Séde) and 5. DRUIDRY 6. HEATHENISM
British journalists (Michael Baigent, Richard Leigh 7. BALTIC NEOPAGANISM
and Henry Lincoln, who also produced a BBC TV 8. NEOPAGAN PRACTICE
series of international fame). Eventually, the idea of
a Jesus’ bloodline, and of the Cathars as custodians 1. INTRODUCTION
of this secret in Southern France, made its way into Neopaganism is a complex phenomenon, repre-
fiction (e.g. Dan Brown, The Da Vinci Code, senting many different traditions, practices and
2003), movies, and even into such internationally beliefs including neopagan witchcraft, neopagan
popular comics as Preacher and The Magdalena. Druidry, Asatra/Heathenism, neo-shamanism,
The alleged connection of these claims with the “non-aligned” Paganism, and initiatory Wicca.
Cathars is understandably regarded with great sus- Each has its own starting point and may have multi-
picion by professional historians, but has undoubt- ple founders or originators. Neopaganism is often
edly added to the mystery and fascination of inspired by the practices of indigenous peoples
“Cathar country”, to the further benefit of local and the paganisms of the ancient world revealed
tourism. Once again, however, this claim has not through archaeology, classics, myth and history.
been immediately translated into a religious neo- However, practices and beliefs are then revived or
Catharism. A General Conference Cathar Church — recreated in the context of modern-day life in a con-
Assembly of Good Christians, is extremely active tinual creative process. This occurs to a greater or
on the Internet through its website www.cathar.net lesser extent in the different traditions which fall
but, despite claims of a large worldwide member- under the term “neopagan”. As a result of these
ship, it seems, in fact, to be a fairly small group. characteristics, in neopaganism, no one belief system
can claim to be correct, and each person has the free-
Jean Kostka (ps. of Jules Doinel), Lucifer démasqué, dom to choose their own religion. Neopaganism has
Geneva-Paris: repr. Slatkine, 1983 ¢ Antoine (Anto- no official doctrines and no central authority.

--- Page 253 ---
829 NEOPAGANISM
This rejection of doctrine and authority is evi- ganism were Freemasons [> Freemasonry] or
dent in definitions of neopaganism as a term cover- members of quasi-Masonic fraternities, the rituals
ing movements which offer a critique, though not and claims of which were carried over and adapted
necessarily rejection of, Christianity. According to in some forms of neopaganism, particularly Wicca
Hanegraaff (1998, 77), this is ‘based on the convic- and Druidry.
tion that what Christianity has traditionally roth century literature also influenced the devel-
denounced as idolatry and superstition actually opment of neopaganism. Throughout the 19th cen-
represents/represented a profound and meaningful tury, the “pagan spirit” of subsequent waves of >
religious worldview and .. . that a religious prac- Romanticism was developing into a paganism as
tice based on this worldview can and should be an attitude of mind which was based on philhel-
revitalized in our modern world’. He goes on to lenism and an exploration of nature and the deities
argue that the term “neopaganism” itself contains of pagan antiquity. Although the beginnings of
a ‘polemical thrust’? towards Christianity as the Romanticism (c. 17908-1810) were overtly Christ-
religion which is held responsible for the decline of ian and esoteric, at least as far as > William Blake
western paganism and the negative perception of it and Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772-1834) were
over the past two thousand years. More recent con- concerned, later, under Lord Byron (1788-1824),
cerns expressed through feminism and environ- Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792-1822), and John Keats
mentalism tend to be seen in neopaganism as the (1795-1821), it became more “pagan” in its
consequence of the loss of pagan wisdom, which emphasis. All three left England for Greece and
must be recovered, and thus Christianity has done Italy for a variety of reasons and the ancient pagan-
the world a disservice in dismissing such wisdom. isms of the Mediterranean figured strongly in their
Nevertheless many, though by no means all, neo- work — Keats, for example, read the 19th century
pagans recognise an esoteric Christianity existing Lempriére’s [Classical] Dictionary to the point
alongside Christian institutions, and this is re- of obsession! Shelley was classically-minded and
garded as compatible with neopaganism. The atti- rebellious, seen as a dreamy lyricist by the Vic-
tude of “being neopagan” in opposition to “being torians, with a recurrent interest in Prometheus,
Christian” is growing more rare. Rather, neopa- though loved by the Italians among whom he made
gans claim to be tolerant and respectful towards his home — his heart was buried in Rome, near
other religions and spiritual practices. Much the grave of Keats for whom he wrote the elegy
changed in the 1990s, as the influence of historical Adonais which contains the exhortation to ‘go to
research permeated neopaganism and historical Rome, which is the sepulchre,/Oh, not of him, but
claims were re-evaluated. Along with this re-evalu- of our joy’ (Adonais, XLVIII, 1-2). Of the three,
ation of the past has come a re-evaluation of Chris- Keats was the most classically minded (and obses-
tianity. Neopagans are involved in the development sive), mixing Elizabethan literature with classicism
of interfaith meetings with members of other reli- and mythologising the ancient world as a dreamy
gions, and as neopaganism has grown in popular- arcadia, an escape from modernity. The 1840s
ity, and public awareness of it has increased, it has saw Alfred, Lord Tennyson (1809-1892) reviving
adopted a less reactive posture which no longer Keats’ love of ancient Greece, albeit from a liberal
requires legitimisation through false histories or Christian perspective, and in the 1850s Matthew
hatred of the Christian Church. Arnold (1822-1888) was drawn to classical themes
and characters, as well as Norse and Christian
2. HISTORICAL ANTECEDENTS Arthurian legends.
Such a perception of Christian and neopagan It is with Algernon Charles Swinburne (1839-
co-existence stems from a shared history within the 1909) that “paganism as an attitude of mind” finds
Western Esoteric Tradition. The antecedents of its clearest expression. Like Keats and Shelley
neopaganism can be found in the late r9th century, before him, Swinburne was a philhellenist and
in academic developments such as Egyptology, the much of his poetry is filled with images of classical
development of tourism to sites of ancient pagan ancient paganisms, the exhuberant paganism of
civilisations in Greece and Rome, the rise of occult Atalanta in Calydon (1865) being a supreme exam-
[> occult / occultism] and magical societies such as ple. He mourned the triumph of Christianity over
the > Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, the paganism in his Hymn to Proserpine, and in The
eastern emphasis of the Theosophical Society, Last Oracle (A.D. 361), recorded the final surren-
and the writings of key figures such as > Aleister der of paganism: ‘And dying, Thou hast con-
Crowley and > Dion Fortune. In addition, many quered, he said,/Galilean; he said it and died...’
leading occultists regarded as influential to neopa- (Poems and Ballads, Second Series, 1878). Such

--- Page 254 ---
NEOPAGANISM 830
tension with Christianity later gave way to an societies. Having spent most of his adult life work-
expression of the divine spirit in humanity, Swin- ing in the Far East, Gardner returned to England in
burne’s personal religion, which he expounded in 1936 and two years later retired to the New Forest
his favourite poem dedicated to the Teutonic god- with his wife, Dorothea, usually known as Donna.
dess Hertha. Here he became involved with the Fellowship
Swinburne’s influence on fellow aesthetes and of Crotona, an occult group of Co-Masons estab-
later poets, such as Walter Pater (1839-1894), was lished by Mrs. Besant-Scott, a daughter of the
considerable. Pater’s Studies in the History of the theosophist > Annie Besant.
Renaissance (1873) and Marius the Epicurean The Fellowship of Crotona allegedly contained a
(1885), and Oscar Wilde’s Poems (1881) were hidden inner group of hereditary witches, who ini-
steeped in classicism. Indeed, in the Fortnightly tiated Gardner in 1939; much about the nature of
Review in 1873, John Morley traced a line of pagan this group remains unclear however. With the
movements from the Oxford Movement, through permission of the “coven”, and under the pseudo-
John Ruskin, the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood and nym Scire, Gardner included the rituals of witch-
William Morris, to Pater’s The Renaissance. The craft in a novel called High Magic’s Aid (1949).
late roth century in particular saw a return to Hel- However, Gardner was not able to publish more
lenic Paganism as a protest against the ‘mechanical open accounts of witchcraft under his real name
and graceless formalism of the modern era’ and, until the repeal of the 1736 Witchcraft Act in 1951
according to Walter Pater and Matthew Arnold, to and its replacement with the Fraudulent Mediums
redress the imbalance caused by Judaeo-Christian Act, which gave freedom for individuals to practice
values, ‘where all sides of one’s being were sacrificed witchcraft so long as no harm was done to person
to the religious side, and where systems of conduct or property. No longer threatened by a law which
and moral codes threatened to become more impor- enabled persecution of a person alleged to have
tant than the spirit which originally inspired them’. magical powers, Gardner wrote Witchcraft Today
Many of the themes contained within the works which was published in 1954 and included an in-
mentioned above echo those of ancient paganisms troduction by Murray, followed by The Meaning of
and anticipate neopaganism: ideas of faith not Witchcraft in 1959.
reduced to a creed; the Stoic and the Epicurean as Witchcraft Today vaulted Gardner into the
narrative devices in philosophical debate; a stress public spotlight, and he made numerous media
on feeling; the importance of the individual, indeed appearances. Believing witchcraft to be a dying
an individuality found in feeling, thus a valuing of religion, he propelled it into the public domain, ini-
the emotions; a celebration of plurality; an ack- tiated many new witches, and encouraged covens
nowledgement that different people react differ- to spring up, operating according to the outlines
ently to, and need, different religions, suited to their provided in his books. By the mid-1950s, Gard-
own personality; and the conflict between “reli- ner’s love of publicity had drawn the religion to the
gion” or “cult” versus institutionalised, established attention of the public, and in the early 1960s it
echurch”. was exported to North America. Gardner died in
1964, but his tradition of Gardnerian Wicca was
Bie GGA firmly established, much to the annoyance of those
Modern neopaganism in the strict sense origi- who practised Traditional and Hereditary witch-
nated in 1940s Britain in the form of a ‘relatively craft, which they believed to be a witchcraft reli-
self-contained, England-based occultist religion’ gion older than Gardner’s Wicca.
(Hanegraaff 1998a, 85) known as Wicca. From Into this stream was injected another current in
this, other neopagan traditions and other varieties the 1960s, as Alex Sanders (1926-1988) brought a
of witchcraft have developed. It is largely un- stronger application of high ritual magic (rooted in
disputed that the development of Wicca was initi- r9th century occultism) to his branch of Wicca.
ated by Gerald Brosseau Gardner (1884-1964), Sanders, a resident of Manchester who claimed a
under the influence of (among others) Margaret witch ancestress from Snowdonia, established his
Murray’s 1921 publication The Witch-cult in own version of Wicca along with his wife Maxine,
Western Europe, Robert Graves, and Aleister which became known as Alexandrian Wicca. He,
Crowley. like Gardner, was a prolific initiator, but did not
Gardner was born in the early years of the fin de confine himself to Britain: many covens in Ger-
siecle in Crosby, Liverpool, and became a Freema- many, the Netherlands, and elsewhere in Northern
son, Rosicrucian [> Rosicrucianism], and member Europe sprang from his visits to the continent.
of the Ordo Templi Orientis and other secret Sanders sought publicity from the very beginning,

--- Page 255 ---
831 NEOPAGANISM
and by the 1970s had become known as the King of different kind of religion, with a less formal and
the Witches. He was regarded by many Gardnerian hierarchical ritual style, Native American in-
witches as a maverick, seeking sensational public- fluences such as shamanism and drumming, the
ity in newspapers and on the television (just as increasing use of psychotherapy within Wicca, and
Gardner had done!). Over time, however, the Wiccan involvement in political and environmental
Alexandrian stream of Wicca came to be consid- activism. In particular, Wicca was adapted by the
ered as valid as the Gardnerian, and the rifts started women’s spirituality movement, resulting in the
to heal. Sanders is now credited with having made development of neopagan Goddess spirituality and
Wicca more accessible and bringing about greater feminist witchcraft traditions such as the Reclaim-
public awareness of it. ing collective, founded in San Francisco in 1980 by
In September 1970, a small group of Wiccans (among others) Starhawk.
established The Pagan Front, which held its inau-
gural meeting in London at Beltane (1st May) 5 DR UrDIRE:
1971. This group had, in 1968, printed an inter- After Wicca, perhaps the most popular form of
coven newsletter called The Wiccan, and the aim of neopaganism is Druidry. Modern neopagan Druids
the Front, like the newsletter, was to facilitate net- draw their inspiration from early evidence of
working between covens and act as a point of first Druidry gleaned from the works of writers such as
contact for those seeking initiation. The organisa- Pliny the Elder and Julius Caesar, as well as from
tion grew relatively quickly, from a print run ofjust Celtic traditions, since Bardic Colleges in Ireland
twelve for the newsletter in 1968 to a circulation of and Scotland continued until the 16th and 17th
250 by 1989 and over 5000 by 2000; it attracted centuries respectively. By this time, antiquarian
neopagans other than Wiccans, but it was not until writers such as John Aubrey (1629-1697), John
1989 that the organisation changed its name to the Toland (1670-1722) and William Stukeley (1687-
Pagan Federation, which even then saw itself as 1765) had revived a Christianised form of Druidry
representing Wicca, rather than neopaganism, in as a religious practice in England. The Welsh
the UK. By the end of the zoth century, the Pagan visionary, poet and charlatan, Edward Williams
Federation had become not only a representative (1747-1822), better known as Iolo Morganwg,
body for neopagans in the UK, but also for those in continued this process. He invented rituals for his
Europe, with more or less autonomous branches in Gorsedd of the Bards of Britain in 1792 which he
France, the Netherlands, Austria, Scandinavia, and claimed were medieval, and which are still per-
elsewhere. formed today as part of the Welsh Royal National
Eisteddfod. His writings were published as The
4. FEMINIST WITCHCRAFT Iolo Manuscripts (1848) and Barddas (1862).
The growing popularity of Wicca from the 1950s The roth century revival of interest in Celtic
onwards thus gave it an enormous amount of studies provided new impetus to the development
influence over the development of neopaganism. of Druidry. In the 2oth century, further revision
From the 1970s, a variety of forms of Wicca, witch- was undertaken through the writings of Lewis
craft and other neopagan traditions developed, Spence, Ross Nichols and others, with present day
many of which derived from Wicca as it became writers such as John and Caitlin Matthews and
more public. Feminist witchcraft developed out of Philip Carr-Gomm continuing the development of
the feminist consciousness movement, as female the tradition. Philip Peter Ross Nichols (1902-
witches took part in the Women’s Movement and 1975) joined the Ancient Druid Order in 1954, but
began to influence the nascent Goddess Movement, on the death of the Chosen Chief, Robert MacGre-
which despite witchcraft involvement does not gor Reid in 1964, the Order split and Nichols
associate itself with either occult, magical tradi- became founder and chief of a reconstituted Order
tions or with neopaganism. Witchcraft and femi- which developed the three grades of Bard, Ovate
nist/Goddess spirituality blend into each other, and and Druid and is thus known as the Order of Bards,
in North America Wicca and neopaganism are vir- Ovates and Druids. Nichols was chief of the Order
tually synonymous. Wicca had been exported to from 1964-1975, and produced a definitive ac-
the United States in the 1960s by an initiate of count of the history and practice of Druidry in The
Gardner’s, Raymond Buckland, and throughout Book of Druidry (1990), the manuscript of which
the late 1970s and 1980s, in North America, neo- was lost for nine years after his death. He is also
paganism increasingly became influenced by the thought to have developed the cycle of eight festi-
emerging > New Age Movement and feminist spir- vals which now make up the Wheel of the Year cel-
ituality. As a result, it was transformed into a very ebrated by most neopagans (the Ancient Druid

--- Page 256 ---
NEOPAGANISM 832
Order had celebrated only the equinoxes and the couched in Judaeo-Christian theology. Partly in
summer solstice). In the 1980s, the Order of Bards, response to this, Heathenry and Heathen witch-
Ovates and Druids developed a correspondence craft — the wiccecraeft and seidr — have been
course in Druidry, offering readings, tapes and reconfigured since the 1980s, their attraction being
workbooks which facilitate progress through the that they are indigenous to northern European
three grades. The Bardic level involves studies of lands which were converted to Christianity much
the four elements of earth, air, fire and water, the later than its homeland around the Mediterranean,
cycle of nature, the Sun, the Earth, the calendar, and that they provide what are believed to be the
poetry and developing the artistic self. In the Ovate only genuine paganisms to exist outside Christian
grade, students work on healing and divinatory constructs.
skills and study tree-lore, animals and plants, Given the Latinisation of the West by Christian
sacred sites, ley-lines, and Arthurian legend. hegemony, people and groups who are drawn to
Druids are trained in the opening and organisation Anglo-Saxon, Germanic and Scandinavian tradi-
of a Druidic group, known as a “grove”. tions and languages prefer to be called Heathen
The emphasis on Celtic, Arthurian, and > Grail rather than neopagan. The term equates with the
mythology is typical of neopagan Druidry, but not Latin “Pagan”, and was coined by the Goths and
all Druid groups are neopagan. For the r9th and used throughout the Germanic languages in the
much of the 2oth centuries, Druidry overlapped Middle Ages to indicate a follower of a non-Chris-
with Christianity and many Druid orders operated tian religion. In some cases, Heathens regard them-
as social or charitable, rather than religious, bod- selves and their traditions as something distinct
ies. In contemporary Druidry, there remains debate from neopaganism, whilst others see Heathenism
as to whether Druidry is a religion, a philosophy or as something distinct within neopaganism. Many
a science. This is not surprising, given the diversity Heathens are particularly concerned with ecology
within contemporary Druidry, which includes neo- and conservation, and regard (other kinds of) neo-
pagan Druids, Christian Druids, Zen Druids and paganism as too removed from the land, which is
even Hasidic Druids. There are also some more perceived as the crux of a people’s identity. Some
light-hearted versions, such as the Berengaria share the eight-fold Wheel of the Year with neopa-
Order of Druids which draws its inspiration from gans, whilst others regard this as too Celtic in its
science fiction series such as Star Trek and Babylon influences and prefer to celebrate festivals (known
5. Many Druids, however, share a vision which is as blots) which they feel are more closely linked
common to neopaganism as a whole in seeking to with their Anglo-Saxon, Germanic and Scandina-
preserve the ecological balance of the Earth and vian ancestry, such as Winternights.
seeing humankind as an integral part of nature Heathens follow the pre-Christian Pagan tradi-
rather than above or in control of nature. It was not tions of Northern Europe, centred around two dis-
until the 1980s that Druid orders which specifically tinctive groups of Norse divinities, the Aesir sky
proclaimed themselves neopagan were established, gods (such as the chief god Odin, Frigga, Thor and
with the foundation of orders such as the British Baldur) and the Vanir earth gods (such as Frey and
Druid Order (1979), which has a shamanic and Freya). Some therefore call themselves by a more
Wiccan influence. The British Druid Order was specific name, such as Asatri or Odinist. Asatra
founded by Chosen Chief Philip Shallcrass (“Grey- was revived in the 2oth century and in 1973 was
wolf”), who was also instrumental in the establish- recognised as an official state religion along with
ment of the Council of British Druid Orders in Christianity in Iceland, with the right to conduct
1988 which has developed into an organisation legally binding weddings and child namings.
representing around twenty Druid orders. He was Meaning “trust in the Aesir”, Asatru is an Icelandic
later joined as Joint Chief by Emma Restall Orr term used by Heathens to denote their affinity to
(“Bobcat”); it is now led solely by the latter, Shall- the Aesir sky-gods of Norse mythology, and is also
crass having retired in 2002. sometimes generally applied to Heathenism, par-
ticularly in North America, where the Asatri
6. HEATHENISM Free Assembly was founded in 1972 by Stephen
A third main grouping is that of the Northern McNallen. Until 1987, the Assembly published a
Traditions, or Heathenism. The assimilation of quarterly journal, The Runestone, and held an
Greco-Roman paganism into Christianity in Late annual festival called The Althing, but the presence
Antiquity, including the Mediterranean images of of racist and National Socialist adherents caused
witchcraft, have led to a greater sense of continuity the assembly to be disbanded.
with, and thus a centrality of, a neopaganism It was succeeded by the Asatri Alliance and the

--- Page 257 ---
833 NEOPAGANISM
Ring of Troth. The Ring of Troth was founded in believed to determine the fate of humans. The Lat-
1987 by Edred Thorsson, and functions as a reli- vian neopagan tradition is known as Dievturi, and
gious institution in which the heritage of the Norse/ its aims are to live in harmony with Nature and
Germanic religions can be reconstructed. Thorsson other members of society and to follow the will of
laid out the basics of the Ring of Troth in his r992 the Gods.
book A Book of Troth. Rune Gild UK is part of this As in neopaganism generally, Baltic neopagan-
organisation, and is led by Freya Aswynn. It spe- ism considers all of nature to be sacred, the Earth is
cialises in the study of the runes, and has three levels regarded as the universal mother, and a seasonal
of membership in common with old craft Guilds — cycle of eight festivals are celebrated — the solstices
Apprentice, Fellow/Journeyman, and Master — over- and equinoxes, together with four other festivals
seen by the Grandmaster (Drighting or Drighten) important in the local agricultural year.
and the High Grandmaster (Yrmin Drighten).
Asatru has a reputation for being more male-ori- 8. NEOPAGAN PRACTICE
ented than some neopagan religions, but Asatri As these brief outlines indicate, neopaganism
groups are led by both men and women and both encompasses a variety of contemporary traditions
officiate in religious ceremonies. Women played an and practices. They have in common a worldview
important role in Norse-Germanic religion as Volvas which reveres nature as sacred, ensouled or alive,
and Seidkonas, the priestess-practitioners of > and they draw on pagan beliefs and practices of the
magic and divination, and these roles are being past, either those of classical civilisations or of
developed along with their associated practices such indigenous peoples, and thus tend to be polytheis-
as the somewhat shamanistic seidr, a form of witch- tic, pantheistic and/or duotheistic rather than
craft once practised widely in northern Europe and monotheistic, at least to the extent of accepting the
described in the Edda, knowledge of which was divine as both male and female and thus including
believed to be imparted by the goddess Freya. both gods and goddesses in their pantheons. Neo-
pagan groups take many forms, from Wiccan
7. BALTIC NEOPAGANISM covens to Druid groves, from Heathen hearths to
The Baltic countries were the last in Europe to be magical lodges, and entry into them may be by for-
Christianised, converting to Christianity only in mal rituals of initiation or informal groupings
the Middle Ages. Baltic pagan practices thus con- based on friendship. Some groups may practice
tinued until the 14th and 15th centuries, with a few magic, whilst others do not. Many use ritual, and
remnants surviving and being celebrated in the lat- almost all make use of myth, celebrating eight sea-
ter half of the 2oth century — as late as 1960 Mid- sonal festivals which together constitute a mythic-
summer was abolished as a national holiday in ritual cycle, usually referred to as The Wheel of the
Lithuania by the Soviet authorities. Lithuanian Year.
neopaganism was formally restored in 1967, These festivals are the so-called Celtic fire festi-
repressed by the Soviets in 1971, and has been vals or cross quarter days of Imbolc/Candlemas
growing in popularity since 1988. (c. February 2nd), Beltane (c. April 30th), Lugh-
In general terms, a distinctive Baltic neopagan- nasadh/Lammas (c. July 31st), and Samhain/Hal-
ism has developed since the late 1980s, becoming lowe’en (c. October 31st), plus the Winter and
particularly strong after the collapse of the Soviet Summer Solstices (December c. 21st and June c.
Union in 1989. In newly re-emerging countries 21st) and the Spring and Autumn equinoxes
such as Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, neopagan- (March c. 21st and September c. 21st). These are
ism has played an important part in efforts to estab- the traditional dates for each festival, but they are
lish national identities. Reinstated neopagan not fixed; many groups often find it easier, for the
festivals attract many thousands of people who practical purpose of getting everyone together, to
believe that participating in the rites of their ances- work to a set date (usually the nearest Friday or
tors is an important part of their cultural heritage. Saturday to the dates given), whilst smaller groups
Lithuania, for example, established a strong neo- or individuals working alone may choose to wait
pagan church and an organisation called Romuva for a specific sign of nature (e.g. first snowdrop for
(after the Medieval Lithuanian central pagan tem- Imbolc) and celebrate on that day. In the southern
ple) which promotes Lithuanian neopaganism and hemisphere, the festivals are reversed in line with
is also active amongst the Lithuanian community the seasons, celebrating the autumnal equinox, for
in the United States. A similar organisation oper- example, whilst northern hemisphere neopagans
ates in Latvia, called Dievturiba, after Dievs the celebrate the vernal equinox. Rites of passage for
sky-god who, along with Laima, goddess of life, is the birth of a new child, menarche (the celebration

--- Page 258 ---
NEOPAGANISM 834
of a girl’s first menstrual period), manhood, mar- Plato, however, several philosophical schools — the
riage, menopause, ageing and death are becoming Stoics and Aristotelians especially — had attained a
more popular, as well as initiation rituals and those powerful influence among thinkers in the Hellenic
which celebrate the phases of the moon. world, and Plotinus’ writings, collected and edited
Nevertheless, great diversity remains the norm, by his student Porphyry (c. 232-c. 305 C.E.), reflect
and commonalities operate on a somewhat his effort to defend the teachings of Plato and the
superficial level. Even when celebrating the Spring ancients against the materialism of the Stoics and
Equinox, for example, different groups within the biologically limited view of the human soul
Wicca, Druidry, Baltic neopaganism, and Hea- seen in Aristotle. In this, Plotinus appropriated and
thenism will perform different rites with different reshaped Stoic cosmology and Aristotelian meta-
deities and mythologies invoked. The lack of any physics into the service of a spiritual Platonism.
central organisational structure allows for an enor- The Plato that Plotinus championed was the author
mous level of variety, and neopaganism at the of mystical doctrines that deified the soul by lifting
beginning of the 21st century looks likely to retain it into the ineffable erotics of the One. According to
its complexity and differentiate further as research Jean Trouillard, the fundamental intuition of the
into local ancient pagan practices continues. Neoplatonists derived from their reflection on the
second part of Plato’s Parmenides, transforming its
Lit.: Margot Adler, Drawing Down the Moon: dialectics of the One into apophatic initiations. It is
Witches, Druids, Goddess-Worshippers, and other this emphasis on the soul’s capacity to be unified
Pagans in America Today, Boston: Beacon Press, 1986 with the One that marks the distinctive contribu-
¢ “Latter-Day Pagans”, The Quarterly Review 182
tion of Plotinus and the later Neoplatonists, yet
(1895), 31-58 @ Jenny Blain, Nine Worlds of Seid-
Magic: Ecstasy and Neo-Shamanism in North Euro- they claimed that this was not an innovation but a
pean Paganism, London: Routledge, 2002 ¢ Vivianne traditional teaching already understood by Plato.
Crowley, “Wicca as Nature Religion”, in: Joanne Pear- It is precisely as a defender of ancient and Pla-
son, Richard H. Roberts, and Geoffrey Samuel (eds), tonic teachings that Plotinus attacked the Gnostics
Nature Religion Today: Paganism in the Modern [> Gnosticism]. Although this term has been mis-
World, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1998,
understood and misused by contemporary scholars
170-179 # Wouter J. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion
as a label for virtually all dualist and anti-cosmic and Western Culture: Esotericism in the Mirror ofSec-
ular Thought, Leiden: Brill, 1996, ch. 4 # Ronald Hut- worldviews in antiquity — thus overlooking the
ton, The Triumph of the Moon: A History of Modern complexity of the various gnostic schools both
Pagan Witchcraft, Oxford: Oxford University Press, dualist and monist — Plotinus himself clearly por-
1999 ¢ Graham Harvey & Charlotte Hardman (eds), trayed the Gnostics as anti-cosmic dualists, and his
Paganism Today: Wiccans, Druids, the Goddess and
great treatise (En. III.8; V.8; V.5; II.9) is devoted
Ancient Earth Traditions for the Twenty First Century,
to refuting their beliefs. Porphyry reports (VP 16;
London: Thorsons, 1996, 3-15 Francis King, Mod-
ern Ritual Magic: The Rise of Western Occultism, cf. Enn. Il.9.10.3-4) that among the “friends” of
Dorset: Prism Press, 1989 ¢ Tanya M. Luhrmann, Per- Plotinus were those who had previously adopted
suasions of the Witch’s Craft: Ritual Magic in Contem- gnostic revelations of Allogenes and Zostrianos,
porary England, Basingstoke: Picador, 1994 @ Loretta and it was for their benefit that Plotinus criticized
L. Orion, Never Again the Burning Times: Paganism these teachings as distortions of Plato and the
Revived, Prospect Heights, Illinois: Waveland Press,
ancients. Specifically, Plotinus argued against gnos-
1995 # Joanne E. Pearson, A Popular Dictionary of
tic anti-cosmicism and the myth of the fall of Paganism, London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2002 # Joanne
Pearson (ed.), Belief Beyond Boundaries: Wicca, Celtic Sophia as cause for creation and the embodiment
Spirituality and the New Age, Aldershot: Ashgate/Mil- of souls. He also characterized their exaltation of
ton Keynes: The Open University, 2002, 15-54. the particular soul to the status of World Soul
as nothing more than “wishful thinking” (En.
JOANNE E. PEARSON Il.9.9.49) and insisted that the human soul should
coordinate itself with the order of the visible cos-
Neoplatonism I: Antiquity mos rather than trying to escape it. For Plotinus,
the soul’s deifying contact with the Nous and the
Neoplatonism was a philosophical school based One is attained only by first aligning itself with the
on Platonic doctrines whose founder, Plotinus sensible cosmos, and he maintains that ali creation
(205-270 C.E.), claimed only to be an exegete of is good and rooted in a mysterious “contempla-
the teachings of Plato (Eun. V.1.8.10-14) and, tion” (thedria) that pervades the spiritual and
before him, of the “ancients”, including the Pytha- material realms (Enn. IJI.8.1). Porphyry reports
goreans. In the more than seven centuries after (VP 16) that both he and Plotinus’ senior pupil,

--- Page 259 ---
835 NEOPLATONISM I: ANTIQUITY
Amelius, were encouraged by their master to con- Iamblichus’ theory of the completely descended
tinue this polemic against the Gnostics and they soul was complemented by his view of sensible
wrote many treatises, now lost. matter as entirely good, a material expression of
Plotinus’ positive assessment of the material cos- the One itself. Iamblichus thus exorcised the
mos and his profound intuition of an active theoria residue of Plotinian dualism with a Pythagorean
creating and sustaining the material cosmos were interpretation of matter as rooted in the divine and
due, in large part, to his effort to refute the Gnos- indefinable dyad, thereby transforming material
tics’ anti-cosmicism and their insistence that “obstacles” into icons capable of uniting the soul
theoria was removed from the cosmos. Some of with the gods. It should be noted that Iamblichus’
Plotinus’ most profound insights were forged in critique of Plotinus follows a trajectory of thought
the heat of his polemic against the Gnostics and initiated by Plotinus himself in his polemic against
influenced several trajectories of his thought. In the Gnostics.
response to gnostic views of matter, evil and the Because the Iamblichean soul was fully em-
soul Plotinus employed Aristotelian terminology to bodied, it suffered an alienation unexplored by
give a positive account of the material world and Plotinus. Following the Pythagorean cosmology of
the soul’s capacity for thedria. On the other hand, the Timaeus, lamblichus maintained that the soul,
his encounter with the Gnostics left its mark, seen made up of divinely numbered proportions (logoi),
especially in Plotinus’ description of the human collaborates with the Demiurge and _ projects
soul and its embodied experience. Acknowledging these logoi outside itself during embodiment,
his divergence from Platonic tradition on this issue, sewing itself into the fabric of the material world.
Plotinus maintained that the human soul does not Although immortal, the embodied soul becomes
fully descend into a body but something of it mortal, separated from its own divinity and unable
remains in the intelligible world (Enn. IV.8.8.1-4; to regain its place in the divine hierarchy without
cf. IV.3.12.1-5; I.1). Thus, despite his polemic the aid of the gods. To recover its divinity, the soul
against the Gnostics, there was an ambiguity in must perform god-empowered rituals using ele-
Plotinus on the value of the material world and the ments from nature that correspond to the divine
status of the embodied soul. logoi projected in its embodiment. Because of this
Porphyry’s student Iamblichus (c. 240-c. 325 alienation, the soul’s salvation was no longer to be
C.E.) criticized Plotinus’ doctrine of the unde- found in theoria and withdrawal from the world
scended human soul for the same reason that Plot- but in theourgia: divine action that transforms
inus had criticized the Gnostics: it diverged from both the soul and the world. The theurgist pos-
the teachings of Plato and the ancients, among sessed practical knowledge of how to bring the soul
whom lamblichus included Pythagoreans and into resonance with material or immaterial ele-
theurgists. Although Plotinus had argued for the ments proportionate both to the degree of its alien-
divinity of the world against the Gnostics, he nev- ation and to the presence of the god in each
ertheless characterized sensible matter as ‘primal element. Among these elements were stones,
and absolute evil’ (Enn. 1.8.3.38-40). Conse- plants, animals, and aromatics (DM V.23) and less
quently, salvation for the soul required an escape material elements such as prayers and chants (DM
from material evil by withdrawing into its unfallen VII.4-5). Because Neoplatonic theurgists employed
essence. The imagery and terms employed by Plot- ritual techniques also used by Gnostics and late
inus to portray the soul’s fall into material reality antique magicians, modern scholars, until recently,
were the same that Gnostics had used to describe dismissed Iamblichus as irrational and supersti-
the descent of Sophia. The soul’s inclination to the tious, representing a decline in Platonic philosophy.
body is, for Plotinus, not a genuine descent but only Yet Plotinus already had acknowledged that wise
an illumination (ellampsis) to what is below while men know how to tap the divine powers hidden in
its essence remains above the shadows of the mate- stones and plants (Enn. IV.4.35), and he, like
rial world (Enn. I.1.12.25-29). In the same way, Iamblichus, praised the Egyptians for building
Plotinus says that the gnostic Sophia did not their temples in proportions designed to secure the
descend into matter ‘but only illuminated (ellamp- presence of the gods (En. IV.3.1). Iamblichean
sai) the darkness. .. .’ (Enn. II.9.10.25-27). Thus, theurgy was a development of this trajectory of
the dualism Plotinus perceived in the Gnostics Plotinus’ thought: a vision of unbroken continuity
remained — at least in residual form — in his own from the One to sensible matter, and with a more
thought, and his view of salvation as the recovery thorough application of Pythagorean teachings
of the soul’s unfallen condition might easily be con- to the alienation of the soul combined with his
strued as correlate to this. It is significant that reading of the Chaldean Oracles, lamblichus

--- Page 260 ---
NEOPLATONISM I: ANTIQUITY 836
worked out its practical consequences. The soul genes or, in Iamblichus’ terms, like the demiurgic
was not to be saved by escaping an evil world but Nous (cf. Steles Seth, 127,20-21). In Marsanes,
by ritually transforming it in theurgy, thus com- these ascents were effected through the ritual use of
pleting its collaboration with the Demiurge. seals that functioned like theurgic sunthémata, and
Barbarian invocations and unintelligible sounds Marsanes’ complex instructions for chanting vow-
were used by theurgists to evoke the presence of els, diphthongs, and consonants to lift the soul into
gods, but these practices were not uncommon in its original spherical body is explained in the
late antiquity and are also evident in both gnostic context of a Pythagorean reflection on numbers
prayers and magical spells. Plotinus had con- where ‘the [decad revealed] the whole place’ (X.25-
demned the Gnostics for trying to manipulate gods 33.1). lamblichus similarly explained that theurgi-
with magical invocations and saw no value in such cal invocations have affinities with the gods and
rites (Enn. II.9.14), while Porphyry afforded them place the soul in its original spherical body — the
only the provisional value of purifying the lower “shape of the gods” (DM IV.z) — designed by the
soul. Yet for post-lamblicheans, including Proclus Demiurge. Despite these similarities, the De Mys-
and Damascius, theurgical chants were understood teriis appeared no earlier than ca. 280 — and
to awaken the divine presence in the soul. Iamblichus’ other writings as late as 325 — which
Iamblichus’ theory explained the function of theur- leaves little time for a direct influence on Marsanes
gical invocations, but their presence in gnostic and (late 3rd or early 4th century). Yet both reflect a
magical literature was not due to Iamblichus; he Syrian provenience, and a direct influence is not
simply provided a philosophical rationale. The impossible.
soul that chants the sacred sounds does not call the The “Sethian” texts (Allogenes, Zostrianos,
god down but is united with the divine activity Three Steles of Seth, and Marsanes) all reflect a
(theia energeia) of the god through its audible strong Platonic influence seen, for example, in the
expression. Theurgic tokens (sunthémata), from prominence of a triune first principle: Being-Life-
stones to sounds, functioned as portals of the inef- Intellect and in the introduction of Power
fable magnetism of the One, which is why Iam- (dynamis) as a mediating principle of the One, for-
blichus insisted that theurgical rites surpass human mulations clearly derived from Middle Platonic,
understanding. Neopythagorean, and possibly Neoplatonic texts.
The Gnostics did not produce an Iamblichus to Michel Tardieu has shown that the author of Zos-
explain their ritual practices, but his theory might trianos (NHC VIII, 1) and Marius Victorinus
profitably be used to explain the rites of gnostic (Adversus Arium) both made use of the same philo-
communities that shared metaphysical tenets with sophic source, which, he argues, is a Middle Pla-
Neoplatonists. An Jamblichean - or Neopy- tonic treatise. If gnostic texts such as Zostrianos
thagorean — influence can be discerned in both were drawing from the same philosophic sources as
metaphysical and ritual elements of the late Plotinus, it is not surprising that their philosophi-
“Sethian” treatise Marsanes which presents a cal concepts and terminology were shared by the
remarkably positive view of the material cosmos. Neoplatonists. It is unlikely that Plotinus would
Having announced his knowledge of the bound- have bothered to criticize them otherwise. The
aries of both spiritual and material worlds the presence of Platonic conceptual structures and the
prophetic narrator states: ‘in every respect the virtual exclusion of all the Jewish and Christian ele-
sense-perceptible world is [worthy] of being saved ments of the earlier “Sethian” corpus suggest that
entirely’ (NHC X.5.24-26), a striking description the later “Sethians” were seeking intellectual cred-
in a gnostic text, possibly reflecting Iamblichus’ ibility among pagan philosophers or, more simply,
positive view of matter. As Iamblichus posited an that they appropriated these teachings as being
ineffable principle above the One of his predeces- anagogically effective. The Chaldaean Oracles,
sors, so Marsanes adds an Unknown Silent One Neopythagorean and Middle Platonic texts, and
above the highest principle of the other “Sethian” the anonymous Commentary on the Parmenides
texts (X.4.19-22), although it is unclear whether have been identified as sources for Sethian meta-
these principles functioned in the same way. Per- physics. The concepts and terms of the Commen-
haps more significantly, the soul’s descent into mat- tary, in particular, influenced these texts, but
ter — exemplified in Marsanes’ Self-Begotten One despite recent discoveries and scholarship there
(Autogenes) — fulfills a demiurgic function, pre- remains significant disagreement on the identity
cisely as described by Iamblichus (DM VIII.3), and of its author. Pierre Hadot has argued for
with similar soteriological consequences: in order Porphyry, who was trying to harmonize the
to ascend, the soul must learn to descend like Auto- teachings of Plotinus with the revelations of the

--- Page 261 ---
837 NEOPLATONISM Il: MIDDLE AGES
Chaldean Oracles, and consequently, as Ruth Neoplatonism II: Middle Ages
Majercik has argued, the Zostrianos and Allogenes
of the Nag Hammadi collection would have to be Platonism is a complex and problematic histori-
4th century revisions of the texts criticized by Plot- ographic category, especially with regard to the
inus. Cogent and persuasive arguments have been Middle Ages. To begin with, only very few original
marshaled both for and against Hadot’s thesis and texts by Plato were known to the Latin West: the
for different chronologies of influence on the first part of the Timaeus, which was only supple-
“Sethian” texts; there is, however, agreement mented by the Meno, the Phaedo and parts of the
among scholars that “Sethian” Gnostics con- Parmenides in the middle of the 12th century. The
formed their revelations with the teachings of image of Plato cherished by medieval authors was
pagan philosophers. If, as Plotinus and Iamblichus thus to a considerable degree filtered by Middle-
maintained, the Neoplatonists were simply passing Platonic and Neoplatonist lenses. The main chan-
on older teachings, elements of which can be seen nels by which Platonic philosophy was transmitted
in Neopythagorean, Middle Platonic, and Her- to the Middle Ages were Calcidius’ translation
metic texts, then perhaps these Gnostics were sim- of and commentary on the Timaeus, Macrobius’
ply drawing from the same sources. Whether they Commentarius in Somnium Scipionis, the works of
dipped into this traditional wisdom upstream or Boethius and Apuleius, Martianus Capella’s De
downstream is a question that has not yet been Nupttis Philologiae et Mercuri, > Pseudo-Diony-
answered definitively. sius, Proclus and of course Patristic authors, most
importantly - Augustine. The African bishop not
Plotinus, Enneads, text and translation in 7 vols. only provided extensive quotes and paraphrases of
(including Porphyry’s Vita Plotini = VP), AH. Arm- Plato’s work, but, together with Boethius and oth-
strong, Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge, MA: Har-
ers, inaugurated an interpretation of Platonism as a
vard University Press, 1966-1988 ¢ Iamblichus, Les
spiritual philosophy that was essentially in agree- mysteres d’Egypt [De Mysteriis = DM], Text and trans-
lation, E. des Places, Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1966; ment with Christianity. For the Middle Ages the
Engl.: lamblichus: De mysteriis (Emma C. Clarke, John name Plato thus implied a syncretistic blend of
M. Dillon & Jackson P. Hershbell, eds. & transl.), Lei- pagan and Christian sources, ranging from Aris-
den, Boston: E.J. Brill, 2004 ¢ The Nag Hammadi totelian, Stoic and Neopythagorean to Middle-
Library in English, J.M. Robinson (ed.), San Francisco: Platonic and Neo-Platonist currents. An additional
Harper and Row, 3rd ed. rev. 1988.
complicating factor is that a significant part of
medieval Platonism did not go under the name of
Lit.: Kevin Corrigan, “The Anonymous Turin Com-
mentary on the Parmenides and the Distinction be- Plato but under that of his pupil Aristotle. From the
tween Essence and Existence in Middle Platonism, the middle of the 12th century pseudo-Aristotelian
Plotinian Circle, and Sethian Gnostic texts”, and John works introduced the Neo-Platonism of thinkers
Turner, “The Setting of Platonizing Sethian Texts in like Proclus (the Liber de Causis) and Plotinus (the
Middle Platonism”, in: Ruth Majercik & John Turner Theologia Aristotelis) under the guise of Aristotle’s
(eds.), Gnosticism and Later Platonism, Atlanta:
secret teachings. Finally, medieval Platonism was
Scholars Press Symposium Series, 2000 # Ruth Majer-
not a static phenomenon but underwent profound cik, “The Existence-Life-Intellect Triad in Gnosticism
and Neoplatonism”, Classical Quarterly 42:2 (1992), transformations in the course of time. With the
475-488 « Birger Pearson, “Theurgic Tendencies in advent of Latin translations of Aristotle’s works in
Gnosticism and Iamblichus’ Conception of Theurgy”, the West from the 12th century onwards Aristotle’s
in: R.T. Wallis and J. Bregman (eds.), Neoplatonism star rose while Plato receded to the background,
and Gnosticism: Studies in Neoplatonism: Ancient and especially with regard to natural philosophy, where
Modern, vol. 6, Albany: SUNY Press, 1992 # Gregory
commentaries on Aristotle’s libri naturales re-
Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul: The Neoplatonism of
placed discussions of Plato’s Timaeus. Never- Iamblichus, University Park: Pennsylvania State Press,
1995 Michel Tardieu, Recherches sur la Formation theless, the picture of an exclusively Platonic
de l’Apocalypse de Zostrien et les sources de Marius domination of the early Middle Ages and a subse-
Victorinus, Res Orientales 9 (1996), 7-114 # Jean quent Aristotelian domination of the later Middle
Trouillard, “Néoplatonisme”, Encyclopedia Univer- Ages has proved to be too simplistic, not least
salis 11 (1968-1973), 681-683 @ Zostrien (NH VIII,r), because the Aristotelianism that the Latin West
(C. Barry, W.P. Funk, P.H. Poirier, J.D. Turner, eds.)
inherited from Arab commentators such as > Avi-
(Bibliotheque Copte de Nag Hammadi, Section
“Textes”, 24), Québec/Louvain & Paris: Presses de cenna was deeply tainted by Neoplatonism. More-
l'Université Laval/Editions Peeters, 2000. over, late medieval theology and metaphysics, for
instance that of Thomas Aquinas, one of the great-
GREGORY SHAW est champions of medieval Aristotelianism, were

--- Page 262 ---
NEOPLATONISM II: MIDDLE AGES 838
heavily influenced by Pseudo-Dionysius and other mological myth adumbrated his prophetic knowl-
Neoplatonist sources. There are thus a number of edge of the Trinity, in which the Father was the
serious difficulties standing in the way of an all- efficient cause of the world, the Son the formal
encompassing study of the relation between cause and the Holy Spirit the final cause. On the
medieval “Platonism” and > Hermetism, itself a other hand, Alan of Lille attributed the same
multi-dimensional phenomenon. For this reason knowledge to Hermes. Especially in his Summa
we have chosen to investigate the ties between Pla- Ouoniam Homines and his Contra Haereticos,
tonic and Hermetic elements in a limited number of Alan claimed that the Asclepius contained in-
authors that represent three different models of tegumenta referring to the Trinitarian dogma.
dealing with Hermetism, namely a fusion with Pla- Thus, against the widespread anti-intellectualism
tonism without much relation to Aristotelianism and fideism of the r2th century, authors such as
(12th century Platonism), a blend of Platonism, Thierry of Chartres and Alan of Lille saw both
Aristotelianism and Hermetism (> Albertus Mag- Plato and Hermes as paradigms of a natural,
nus), and finally a mixture of Platonism and Her- rational knowledge of God and central dogmas of
metism with anti-Aristotelian overtones (Berthold Christian faith.
of Moosburg). Given this intimate bond between Plato and Her-
The first group has often been referred to as mes, it is no surprise that the 12th century Platonic
the “Platonists of the 12th century”, comprising cosmological-cum-theological framework was per-
authors such as William of Conches (ca. ro80-ca. meated by a wealth of Hermetic elements, deriving
Eay4)sedhierry of «Chartres (=-after’ 1156); from the Asclepius and apocrypha such as the
Bernard Silvester (ca. 1080-1167), and Alan of Liber viginti quattuor philosophorum and the
Lille (ca. 1128-1203). Against the traditional pic- Liber de sex rerum principiis.
ture of a common Platonic “School of Chartres”, First of all, we recognize Hermetic elements in
which most of these authors were claimed to be a the way these authors elaborated on the three cos-
member of, scholars such as Southern and Maren- mological principles derived from Plato’s Timaeus:
bon have tried to make a case for the richness and God, matter (hulé) and the world soul. For
complexity of their philosophy and_ theology, instance, In his Cosmographia Bernardus Sylvestris
downplaying the importance of Platonism as a describes matter as an unformed entity, the fecun-
common philosophical ideology. Nevertheless, the dity of which can give rise to both good and bad
fact remains that these authors underwent a con- creations, thus paraphrasing the Asclepius. But the
siderable influence of Platonic philosophy. The most significant presence of Hermes is found in dis-
most conspicuous characteristic of their reception cussions on the world soul. Like Pierre Abailard,
of Plato was the fusion between the cosmology Thierry of Chartres identified the Platonic world
and natural philosophy of the Timaeus with Chris- soul with the Holy Spirit, the third person of the
tian theology. The leading idea here was that by Trinity. This in turn he equated with the pneuma or
means of a detailed investigation of the natural spirit of the Asclepius, which guides and deter-
world, the philosopher would be able to gather the mines the world. After the Council of Sens (1140)
power, goodness and wisdom of its Creator. The had forbidden the equation of the (created!) anima
mythical and allegorical elements of Plato’s cos- mundi of the Timaeus with the Third Person of the
mology were seen as integumenta and involucra, Trinity, most authors became more cautious in the
words that concealed a deeper, hidden meaning way they dealt with spirit. Bernard Sylvester, for
that had to be dug up by the philosopher. This instance, considered the world soul as Nature
hermeneutical programme not only led to a free itself, the force that keeps the world together as an
interpretation of ancient texts but also inspired a ordered whole. In this respect, the Asclepius was
range of cosmologies and cosmogonies that them- again a major source of inspiration, especially with
selves had a poetical and allegorical style that was its Stoic connection between spirit and fate, its
tributary to the Platonic tradition (see e.g. Bernard insistence on the determinate sequence of causes in
Sylvester’s Cosmographia and Alan of Lille’s De the universe and its equally Stoic astral determin-
Planctu Naturae). ism, in which the sublunary world is governed and
Following Quodvultdeus, Lactantius and other determined by the stars. Another escape route
conciliatory sources, 12th century Platonists saw was taken by Alan of Lille who continued to iden-
Plato and Hermes [> Hermes Trismegistus] as pro- tify world soul and Holy Spirit, but bypassing allu-
tagonists of the same tradition of Oriental-Greek sions to Plato, referred to Asclepius 23 with its
wisdom. Peter Abailard (1079-1142) and Thierry claim that God created eternal Gods. In this fash-
of Chartres, for instance, believed that Plato’s cos- ion, Alan attempted to avoid the fusion of the finite

--- Page 263 ---
839 NEOPLATONISM II: MIDDLE AGES
Platonic world soul and the eternal Third Person of in De Causis, that place the Thrice Great with the
the Trinity. “older Peripatetics”. In the end, this classification
Another domain in which Platonic and Hermetic is of small importance, because according to
elements were combined concerns the relation Albert’s conciliatory programme true philosophy
between God’s immanence in the world and His should reunite Aristotelianism and Platonism. In
radical transcendence. 12th-century Platonism was fact, Albert’s “Peripateticism” is largely deter-
heir to the complexities of late Neoplatonism with mined by Averroes, Avicenna, Alfarabi and other
its tension between the ineffability of the One and authors with a strong Neoplatonist outlook. A
its emanative immanence in the world. Again, this number of characteristic Hermetic elements have
Neoplatonist framework was filled with Hermetic flown into Albert’s mixture of Aristotelianism and
elements. Both Thierry of Chartres and Alan of Platonism.
Lille not only explained God’s ineffability with First, Hermes is referred to in the context of
the help of Pseudo-Dionysius’ doctrine of divine Albert’s metaphysics and theology. Together with
names, but also on the basis of Asclepius 20 which Platonism, Hermes is credited by Albertus for inau-
states that God bears all names. According to these gurating the idea of a divine fluxus in which all
authors, God’s ineffability is not rooted in His tran- forms and all being are derived from the First
scendence, but precisely in His radical immanence: Cause. Nevertheless, like the Platonists, Hermes
because God is all being, He bears all names, which errs with respect to the particulars of this process.
is the same as saying that no name can express the According to Albertus the causal inflow should not
divine source of the totality of being. Most 12th- be modelled in terms of an “infusion” of form and
century Platonists made use of the Hermetic notion being into matter by a higher, intelligent cause. This
of Unomnia: the idea that all being participates in kind of conception may lead to a dangerous pan-
the One gives rise to the conclusion that the One theism in which the very ontological hierarchy is
is immanent in all being (God is every stone, every abolished, because all things are believed to
tree etc.). The majority of authors expressly tried to directly emanate from the highest cause and share
avoid simplistic pantheist conclusions, with the in its essence. As an alternative to the Platonic-Her-
exception of David of Dinant (ca. 1160-1200), metic view of causal infusion, Albertus launched
whose Quaternuli were condemned by the Synod his “peripatetic” view of eductio formarum: forms
of Paris in 1210. Finally, especially in Alan of Lille are created by Intellects that emanate from the first
we find a strong usage of the definitions of the cause. These Intellects draw the lingering, potential
Liber XXIV Philosophorum in determining the forms out of matter in the sense that they act as a
relation between God and His creation. The image paradigm which is imitated by the created thing
of God as the monad and the circle whose centre is that produces a likeness or an image of it. Contrary
everywhere and circumference nowhere were to what Hermes claims, the Dator Formarum, the
woven into a basically Neoplatonist metaphysics giver of forms, is thus transcendent to the lower
of unity and participation. levels of reality and does not directly infuse them
The relation between Platonism and Hermetism with his own being. By stating in the Asclepius that
underwent substantial change in the works of > all things are full of a spirit which transmits the
Albertus Magnus (1193-1280). The Dominican virtues of the gods, Hermes shows that he has some
professor was one of the first to deal with the tide awareness of this truth, but it remained to the Aris-
of translations of Aristotle in the 13th century. totelians to fill in the details of this conception.
Hence, most of his work consisted of commen- A similar combination of Aristotelian, Platonic
taries on Aristotle’s texts. Nevertheless, Albert’s and Hermetic elements may be witnessed in the
Aristotelianism was certainly not uncritical and case of Albert’s doctrine of the intellect, a central
was combined with a strong Neoplatonist in- doctrine within his system. Albertus mentions
fluence mostly derived from Arab and Jewish active and possible intellect, impressed species and
sources, and, especially in his later life, from the other Aristotelian jargon, but again inspired by
Liber de Causis, which Albertus considered to be Alfarabi, Avicenna and others he gives a Platonic
Aristotelian. In fact, Albertus spoke of three differ- twist to these terms. According to Albertus the
ent philosophical schools, the Epicureans, The Sto- process of philosophical contemplation is a matter
ics, which comprised Plato and the Academy, and of the active intellect joining itself with us, hence
the Peripatetics. Hermes was usually grouped with creating the intellecta in our soul. The possible
the Stoics and was thus made responsible for intellect receives the light of this knowledge and is
inaugurating philosophical idealism. Nevertheless, thus made similar to the intelligible forms. The end
there are also places in Albert’s work, for instance result of this process is the intellectus adeptus,

--- Page 264 ---
NEOPLATONISM II: MIDDLE AGES 840
which he defines as the presence of the known form pagan Hermes would have intuitively grasped the
within the soul. Philosophical knowledge is thus a attributes of God, which is proved by his words
kind of contemplation and illumination by means about the generation of the Logos from the Father
of which the soul gradually unites itself with the (Asclepius 26) and his doctrine of pneuma, which
One. Again, Albertus introduces Hermetic ele- Berthold identifies with the Holy Spirit. It is there-
ments in this Aristotelian-Platonic mixture. First of fore no surprise that we find a substantial number
all, he describes the process of contemplation in of references to Hermes in Berthold’s work. Her-
terms of asceticism, purification and divination mes teaches God’s ineffability, His omnipotence
and other concepts derived from the Asclepius. and causality, His presence within the created uni-
Moreover, in his Liber de intellectu et intelligibili verse, the processes of exitus, mansio and reditus
he adopts the Hermetic image of man as nexus dei applied to the trinity and man as microcosm. In
et mundi. On the one hand, man assimilates him- this fashion, Hermetic doctrines provide impor-
self to God, but by doing so he may also act as the tant additions to Proclus’ “Platonic” philosophical
gubernator of the lower world. Philosophical > system.
mysticism is thus transfigured into a kind of >
magic in which man uses his divine powers in order Alan of Lille, De Planctu naturae, ed. N.M. Haring,
to rule, transform and purify the lower worlds. In Studi Medievali, terza serie 19.2 (1978), 797-879 ¢
Alan of Lille, Summa quoniam homines, ed. P. Glo-
this connection, Albertus also cites the Hermetic
rieux, “La Somme Quoniam Homines d’Alain de
trope of man as imago mundi, which he interprets Lille”, Archives d’histoire doctrinale et littéraire du
in a Platonic sense: by assimilating the intelligible Moyen Age 20 (1953), 113-364 # Bernardus Silvestris,
forms within the intellect, the human soul becomes Cosmographia, ed. P. Dronke, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1978
in fact a microcosmos mirroring the macrocosmos. ¢ Albert the Great, De Causis et processu universitatis
Albertus was the founder of an alternative philo- (Opera Omnia T 17, P 2), ed. W. Fauser, Monasterii
sophical school among Dominicans in the German Westfalorum: Aschendorff, 1993 Albert the Great,
De Intellectu et intelligibili (Opera Omnia 9), ed.
lands, which not only comprised philosophers
A. Borgnet, Paris: Vivés, 1890, 477-525 ¢@ Berthold of
such as Ulrich of Strasburg (ca. 1225-1277) and Moosburg, Expositio super Elementationem theo-
Berthold of Moosburg (= 1361), but also mystics logicam Procli (Corpus Philosophorum Teutonicorum
such as Eckhart and Tauler. Insofar as Hermetism Medii Aevi 6, 1-2), ed. M.R. Pagnoni-Sturlese and
is concerned, the most interesting representative of L. Sturlese, Hamburg: Meiner, 1984-1986.
this current is Berthold of Moosburg, who com-
posed a commentary on Proclus, the Expositio Lit.: A. De Libera, Albert le Grand et la Philosophie,
Paris: Vrin, 1990 @ A. De Libera, “Albert le Grand et
super Elementationem Theologicam Procli (1340-
le Platonisme: De la doctrine des Idées a la theorie des
1360). In contradistinction to Albertus, Berthold trois états de universel”, in: E.P. Bos and P.A. Meijer
did not aim at reconciling Aristotelianism and Pla- (eds.), On Proclus and His Influence in Medieval Phi-
tonism, but opposed the Platonism of Proclus to losophy, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1992, 89-119 @ S. Gersh &
the dominant Aristotelian culture of the schools. M. Hoenen (eds.), The Platonic Tradition in the
Again, however, these labels should be handled Middle Ages: A Doxographic Approach, Berlin: Walter
de Gruyter, 2002 ¢ T. Gregory, Anima Mundi: Lawith caution: Proclus’s Elementatio itself is cer-
filosofia di Gugielmo di Conches e la scuola di
tainly not free from Aristotelianism and also
Chartres, Firenze: Sansoni, 1955 # T. Gregory, “The
Berthold’s own interpretation in no way amounts Platonic Inheritance”, in: P. Dronke (ed.), A History
to “pure Platonism”. Nevertheless, he presents of Twelfth-Century Western Philosophy, Cambridge:
an uncompromising anti-Aristotelian programme, Cambridge University Press, 1988, 54-80 ¢ E.
which is based on the distinction between the Jeauneau, “Lectio Philosophorum”: Recherches sur
ontology of the Peripatetics, the sententia peri- PEcole de Chartres, Amsterdam: Hakkert, 1973 ¢
P. Lucentini, “L’Asclepius ermetico nel secolo XI”, in:
pateticorum that only deals with the “terrestrial”
J. Westra (ed.), From Athens to Chartres: Neoplaton-
doctrine of metaphysics as the science of being qua ism and Medieval Thought. Studies in Honour of
being, and the true metaphysics of the Platonists, Edouard Jeauneau, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1992, 397-421
the supersapientialis scientia platonica that is D. Mahnke, Unendliche Sphare und Allmittelpunkt,
gained by the soul’s mystical unitio with the divine Stuttgart — Bad Canstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1966
forms. Berthold brought about a complete fusion (reprint of Halle, 1937) # J. Marenbon, “Twelfth-
of this Platonism with Hermetism. Unlike Alber- century Platonism: Old Paths and New Directions”, in:
idem, Aristotelian Logic, Platonism and the Context of
tus, Berthold dropped the reservations about the
Early Medieval Philosophy in the West, Aldershot:
Liber XXIV Philosophorum, whose definitions of Ashgate-Variorum, 2000, 1-21 ¢ M.R. Pagnoni-
God as monas and as circle he happily quoted. Sturlese, “A propos du néoplatonisme d’Albert le
Berthold also revived the ancient idea that the Grand: Aventures et mésaventures de quelques textes

--- Page 265 ---
841 NEOPLATONISM III: SINCE THE RENAISSANCE
d’Albert dans le Commentaire sur Proclus de Berthold squared with Christianity. In fact, one of Ficino’s
de Moosburg”, Archives de Philosophie 43 (1980), key projects was to develop a new kind of scholas-
635-654 @ A. Sannino, “Berthold of Moosburg’s Her-
ticism that would reunite Christian faith with
metic Sources”, Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld
Platonic philosophy as an alternative to what was
Institutes 63 (2000), 243-258 ¢ R.W. Southern, Pla-
tonism, Scholastic Method and the School of Chartres, seen as the heretical and anti-Christian “obsceni-
Reading: Reading University Press, 1979 ¢ L. Sturlese, ties” of Averroist and Alexandrist > Aristotel-
“Proclo ed Ermete in Germania da Alberto Magno a ianism. Moreover, since Plato was not seen as an
Bertoldo di Moosburg: Per una prospettiva di ricerca isolated figure but as the head of a unified philo-
sulla cultura filosofica tedesca nel secolo delle sue ori- sophical tradition, Ficino and others read
gini (1250-1350)”, in: K. Flasch (ed.), Von Meister
Neoplatonist philosophy back into Plato’s works.
Dietrich zu Meister Eckhart, Hamburg: Meiner, 1984,
Plotinus in particular was very dear to Ficino’s 22-33 @ L. Sturlese, “Saints et magiciens: Albert le
Grand en face d’Hermés Trismégiste”, Archives de heart. He produced a complete translation of the
Philosophie 43 (1980), 615-634 # R.B. Woolsey, Enneads and considered Plotinus as the inter-
“Bernard Silvester and the Hermetic Asclepius”, Tra- preter that came closest not only to Plato’s mean-
ditio 6 (1948), 340-344. ing but to Christianity as well. During the
Renaissance, Ficino’s translation of Plato was read
CEES LEIJENHORST together with his renderings of Plotinus, Iam-
blichus, Proclus and other Neoplatonist phil-
Neoplatonism III: Since the Renaissance osophers. With the help of Proclus’ and Plotinus’
complex conceptual structures Plato was thus
Platonism existed in many guises and at various interpreted in a highly systematical manner, which
places in the 13th and r4th centuries, especially in left no room for the aporetic and open-ended
Italy. It was, however, mainly due to one man that character of many of his dialogues. The Plotinian
Platonism became such a dominant current in the One or God was placed at a great distance of the
Renaissance: > Marsilio Ficino, who published Many of this world, and the gap was filled with
the first complete translation of Plato in Latin in the celestial hierarchies of ~ Pseudo-Dionysius
1484, outdoing all earlier (partial) translations by Areopagita, who became as popular in the
Renaissance figures such as Bruni, Filelfo, George Renaissance as he had been among Medieval
of Trebizond and Cardinal Bessarion. Platonism thinkers such as Thomas Aquinas. Early Renais-
had certainly not been unknown to the Latin West sance authors still believed in the myth according
during the Middle Ages [> Neoplatonism II], but to which Dionysius was not only the Areopagite
the more than thirty printings of Ficino’s Platonis whom St. Paul had converted to Christianity, but
Opera Omnia in the 16th century alone gave a also the one that had later become bishop of Paris.
new and powerful impetus to the development of Eventually Valla’s philological démasqué of this
the Platonic tradition. In fact, Ficino’s translation myth in his In Novum Testamentum Annota-
continued to be read well into the rgth century. tiones, printed in 1505, weakened the authority of
Nevertheless, the availability of Plato’s complete the Pseudo-Dionysian writings, but until that time
text did not mean that Ficino and Renaissance great minds such as Ficino and > Nicolas of Cusa
Platonists returned to the original and pure still considered Dionysius one of the greatest the-
Platonism. Byzantine scholars such as Cardinal ologians of all time. In fact, Dionysian negative
Besssarion and George of Trebizond not only theology was a key influence on Cusanus’ doctrine
bequeathed their Greek manuscripts to Italian of docta ignorantia. An even more interesting
humanists, but also a set of hermeneutical tools case of Dionysian influence is ~ Jacques Lefévre
that were employed in reading these texts. d’Etaples, who opposes the pure Christianityof
Following Bessarion and others, Ficino read (and Dionysius against the debased philosophies of the
translated!) Plato through profoundly Neo- Platonists who had supposedly stolen most of his
platonic lenses. Plato was put into the syncretistic ideas.
framework of a tradition of prisca sapientia and On the whole, scholars have come to emphasize
pia philosophia [> Tradition] which was sup- the continuities with medieval Platonism, at the
posed to reach back to - Moses and pagan expense of the discontinuities that were often
prophets such as > Zoroaster and - Hermes stressed by Renaissance thinkers themselves. For
Trismegistus who had transmitted a sacred wis- one thing, ~ Augustine remained as important to
dom that foreshadowed the advent of Christ. In Ficino as a source of Christian Neoplatonism as
other words, attention was very much focused on he had been to the Middle Ages. Moreover, fol-
those aspects of Plato’s teachings that could be lowing 12th-century Platonists, the young Ficino

--- Page 266 ---
NEOPLATONISM III: SINCE THE RENAISSANCE 842
was excited by the pseudo-Hermetic definitions of and Aristotelianisms, we had better speak of the
God as the monad and as a circle whose circum- Hermetisms of the Renaissance.
ference is everywhere and centre nowhere (Liber As for the Platonisms of the Renaissance
viginti quattuor philosophorum, defs. 1-2). He specifically, in what follows we will discuss them
used these doctrines in order to bring the at the example of only a few of the most influen-
Christian idea of divine creation in concordance tial authors, and further restrict ourselves to those
with both Hermetism [> Hermetic Literature] and who clearly present themselves primarily as
the Platonic account of the Demiurge in the philosophers. It must be emphasized, however,
Timaeus, an endeavour which in itself clearly that the influence of Neoplatonism was much
betrays the influence of William of Conches and more widespread than can be demonstrated in a
other r2th-century Platonists. These continuities short overview. To give only one example, the
notwithstanding, the very fact that the entire famous > Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa — primarily
Platonic corpus was now available did create a a humanist theologian, cultural critic, and author
powerful new momentum in Renaissance culture. on magic — consistently attacked Aristotelian
Still, it is important to recognize that although a scholasticism in favour of a broadly Neoplatonic
few special chairs of Platonic philosophy had been worldview. Among other things, he lectured on
created (for example that of > Francesco Patrizi in Plato’s Symposium in 1512, and he rejected schol-
Rome) and avowed Platonists were present at astic notions of the relation between reason and
regular university chairs (for example Francesco faith in favour of a fideism strongly inspired by
Piccolomini at Padua), Neoplatonism remained Neoplatonism.
largely an extra-academic affair. The metaphysical To begin with Ficino: despite his great venera-
speculations of the Platonists proved to be more tion for Hermes, the impact of specific Hermetic
attractive to a non-academic public than the strict doctrines on his Neoplatonic philosophy is some-
logic of academic Aristotelianism, inspiring musi- what limited. True, we find in Ficino the same
cians [> Music], poets and painters as well as combination of a pessimist perspective on the
statesmen such as Cosimo and Lorenzo de’ world as the dark abyss of materiality with the
Medici. idea that the beauty and order of the natural
The link between Renaissance Neoplatonism world reveals the perfection of its Maker.
and Hermetism was as potent as it had been in the Moreover, Ficino tries to bring the idea of God as
works of medieval Platonists such as Alanus ab the transcendent One in concordance with His
Insulis or Berthold of Moosburg, and this makes it immanence in the world He created. But these are
difficult — indeed, artifical to some degree — to dis- rather vague parallels that can also be found in the
cuss Renaissance Neoplatonism separately from various strands of (Christian) Neoplatonism,
Renaissance Hermetism. Following Lactantius which moreover applied more philosophical
and other ancient sources, all Neoplatonists of the rigour to these themes, a fact which certainly
Renaissance subscribed to the myth of a prisca appealed to Ficino’s sharp philosophical, if not
sapientia and a pia philosophia already referred to scholastic, mind. On the whole, it seems that
above: a current of primordial pagan wisdom, cul- Ficino’s initial enthusiasm for Hermes later gave
minating in Platonism, which prior and/or parallel way to a deep fascination with Neoplatonism, and
to the Mosaic prophesies had paved the way for with Plotinus in particular. Furthermore, although
Christian revelation. Together with Zoroaster, Ficino emphasizes the pre-Trinitarian character of
Hermes was usually seen as one of the first of Hermes’ speculations, he never ceased to empha-
these pagan sages. Thus, the Corpus Hermeticum, size that the Egyptian sage had been granted only
whose first complete translation into Latin was a glimpse of God. Ficino, himself an ordained
also produced by Ficino, was considered a source priest, never questioned the need for Revelation.
of the most ancient and most venerable wisdom The same conclusion also applies to Plato, who
on earth. Nevertheless, although most Neo- just like Hermes had only glimpsed the Trinity and
platonists shared this image of Hermes as a vener- other basic Christian tenets, which can never be
able prophet, the impact of the works attributed perfectly known independent of the Revelation. In
to him on the various protagonists of Renaissance the same context, Ficino sharply repudiated later
Platonism was certainly not univocal. Recent Platonici, such as Numenius, Philo, Plotinus,
scholarship has therefore become much more cau- Iamblichus and Proclus for having stolen most of
tious than Frances Yates (1964) with her sweeping their ideas from the Gospel of St John, St Paul’s
claims about a unified “Hermetic Tradition”. Just Epistles and the Areopagite. Even his great hero
like in the case of the Renaissance’s Platonisms Plotinus did not escape this criticism. Despite his

--- Page 267 ---
843 NEOPLATONISM III: SINCE THE RENAISSANCE
exposure to Christianity, Plotinus had failed to unity behind the world’s apparent diversity by
understand the true nature of the Trinity, even to means of “musical”, i.e. harmonical, proportions
the extent of reverting to the heresy of Arianism |-> Music III]. Many of these proportions are con-
by subordinating the second and third hypostases ceived of in analogical fashion and pertain to >
of his system to the first one. Although Ficino took Number Symbolism rather than to mathematics in
over many important doctrines of Plotinus and his the strict sense of the word. Giorgio’s key doctrine
fellow Platonici in his campaign for a Christian is that of God as the Hermetic Monas, who
philosophy, he was never tempted to exalt pagan unfolds His infinite fecundity in the harmonious
metaphysics at the expense of Christian theology. world He creates. In this connection, he states that
~ Giovanni Pico della Mirandola subscribed to both Hermes and Plato beautifully explained the
the concordist notion of prisca sapientia, which in creation of the world, in a way which may help
his case gave rise to the grand project of his destroy the heresies of Aristotle, Averroes,
Conclusiones, that tried to reunite all pagan and Epicurus and Alexander of Aphrodisias.
Christian learning. However, during his brief life With > Francesco Patrizi (1529-1597) Renais-
Pico actually limited himself to the less lofty task sance concordism changes its character. For
of harmonizing Aristotelianism and Platonism, Patrizi, the concord is between Hermetism and
with the metaphysics of De Ente et Uno (1492) as Neoplatonism on the one hand, and Christianity
the first result. Like Ficino, Pico was a strong on the other, excluding the heresies of academic
admirer of Plotinus — in fact, he urged Ficino to Aristotelianism. Moreover, unlike Ficino, Patrizi
complete his translation of the great Neoplatonist. attached little importance to Moses and the
The only point on which Pico disagreed with the Hebrew prophets. In fact, contrary to Ficino’s
Neoplatonists was precisely the relation between Christian Platonism that sees itself as the culmina-
“being” and “one” as predicates of God. He thus tion of both the Mosaic prophetic current and the
rejected the Neoplatonist reading of Plato’s Greek philosophical-theological current, Patrizi
Parmenides, which was supposed to confirm the elaborated a tradition of Hermetic Platonism in
Neoplatonic idea that the hypostasis of the “One” which Christian thought appears to play a subor-
or God is above being, superessentialis as the dinate part, rather than being its perfection or cul-
Latin translation of Proclus has it. According to mination. Furthermore, unlike Ficino, he did not
Pico, the Parmenides was just a dialectical exer- use the figure of Hermes to legitimize magic.
cise, whereas in all of his other dialogues Plato Patrizi was mainly interested in those elements of
was in basic agreement with Aristotle’s thesis con- the Corpus Hermeticum that can be squared with
cerning the convertibility of being and oneness. Neoplatonist metaphysics, and neglected magical
Both predicates can be assigned to God and thus [> magic] and astrological [> astrology] doc-
stand at the same ontological level. It is, further- trines. Patrizi’s threefold Hermetic-Platonic proj-
more, not insignificant that Pico’s unfinished ect involved, firstly, a new edition of the Corpus
Disputationes adversus astrologiam divinatricem Hermeticum, the Chaldaean Oracles and other
unequivocally condemned Hermetism as an in- Hermetica. Secondly, the Discussiones Peripa-
ferior kind of learning and opposed it unfa- teticae (1581) takes up Ficino’s idea of a philo-
vourably to both Platonism and Aristotelianism. sophical concord and the tradition of prisca sapi-
The wisdom of the Egyptians, which includes entia in an anti-Aristotelian manner. Thirdly,
Hermetism, is here portrayed as a practical disci- Patrizi wrote the Nova de Universis Philosophia
pline of worship and not as theoretical science. (1591), an all-encompassing philosophical system
Hermetism provides at best a first inadequate that tries to explain the Hermetic “revelation” by
sketch of the superior physics and metaphysics of means of philosophical, especially Platonist, argu-
Plato and especially Aristotle, since it lacks the ments. This work starts from the premise that
defining characteristic of true science, that is to man by the sole light of his reason can arrive at
say, rational argument (Disputatio adversus the understanding of the central “mysteries” of
astrologiam divinitatricem, in Opera Omnia, faith, such as the doctrine of the Trinity. Thus, at
Basel 1557 [reprint Hildesheim 1969], 721-722). the centre of Patrizi’s metaphysics we find an
The Franciscan friar Francesco Giorgio da exposition of the doctrine of the Trinity which
Veneto’s (1453-1540) main work, De Harmonia uses Orphic, (pseudo)Zoroastrian and Hermetic
Mundi (1525), is an amazing amalgam of teachings as the point of departure, rationally
Neoplatonism, Hermetism, kabbalah [> Jewish proving the consubstantiality of the three divine
Influences III] and Franciscan spirituality. The persons in a Neoplatonist vein. In this context,
Harmonia Mundi tries to uncover the hidden Patrizi gave a quite daring interpretation of the

--- Page 268 ---
NEOPLATONISM III: SINCE THE RENAISSANCE 844
term “fides” (faith). Faith is not the irrational or grades of reality, ending in adumbrations of the
pre-rational acceptance of certain doctrines on the divine intelligence.
basis of the authority of the Church; rather, it is The last great representatives of Renaissance
the “post-rational”, final “assensio” to divine Platonism were the so-called Cambridge
truth which is bred by rational cognition (“cogni- Platonists, especially > Ralph Cudworth and >
tio”). These doctrines make clear that Patrizi’s Henry More. These philosophers continued to
Hermetic Neoplatonism substantially differed uphold the typical Renaissance idea of phil-
from the Christian Neoplatonism of Ficino and osophia perennis and prisca sapientia. In this con-
Pico. Patrizi liberated Hermetism from its subor- text, they were not too worried about Isaac
dinate role and placed it on the same level as both Casaubon’s dating of the Hermetic writings in
Christian Revelation and Neoplatonist meta- 1614, either contesting the conclusions he drew
physics. Hermes is not just used to adorn or legit- from his arguments (Cudworth) or happily ignor-
imize an otherwise Neoplatonist philosophy; ing them (More). These authors again defended a
instead, Hermetic tenets almost receive the status very eclectic mix of Neoplatonism, but tried to
of articles of faith, that are rationally explained by distance themselves from an esoteric reading of
means of the conceptual apparatus of Neo- Plato such as practised by the English hermetic
platonist metaphysics. author ~ Thomas Vaughan. This did not prevent
+ Giordano Bruno (1548-1600) gave yet an- Henry More from defending beliefs in witch-
other twist to the concordist tradition. Like craft and ghosts. Inspired by Ficino and like-
Patrizi, he combined a deep mistrust of Aristo- minded Renaissance predecessors, More, Cud-
telianism with a profound admiration for the pre- worth and the other Cambridge Neoplatonists
Platonic tradition; but unlike his predecessors, he tried to restore the bond between Christianity on
was not in the least interested in the synthesis the one hand and philosophy and science on the
between old pagan teachings and Christian doc- other, so as to repair the damage done by the
trine. The dignity of prisca sapientia does not con- materialism and atheism of the modern mechani-
sist in its having glimpsed the Trinity. The figure of cal philosophy represented by Thomas Hobbes
Hermes was far less central to Bruno than has and others. Of crucial importance was their
been claimed by Frances Yates in her influential defense of spiritual entities in nature, most
study on Bruno (1964); rather, he put emphasis on notably the “Plastic Nature”, a late descendant of
the ancient philosophers of his native southern the Platonic anima mundi. Thanks to translations
Italy, Pythagoras in particular. (Pseudo-)Pytha- of their works, More and Cudworth were espe-
gorean numerological speculation about the Unity cially popular in 18th-century Germany, where
that gives birth to the many is at the heart not only Leibniz was one of their most famous admirers.
of Bruno’s metaphysics but also of his atomism. They also influenced Coleridge and, through
He combined this with the typically Neoplatonic Thomas Taylor, the English Romantics [>
dialectics of transcendence and immanence, as Romanticism] and American Transcendentalists.
found in Plotinus and Proclus. Very importantly, Up to the 18th century, the term “Platonism”
however, he criticized the Neoplatonists for locat- generally stood for what was in fact an eclectic
ing the transcendent Monas in “another place” mix of Neoplatonism, Hermetism, Christianity
beyond this world. Since this world is infinite, and other elements. With a few notable exceptions
there is no spatial “other” to this cosmos. Rather, such as Jacques Lefévre d’Etaples, most philoso-
the One should be sought for in another dimen- phers and theologians did not make a clearcut dis-
sion of reality, in a higher metaphysical rather tinction between Plato and the Platonici. This pic-
than physical realm. Similarly, Bruno grounded ture started to change in the beginning of the 18th
the infinity of the world in the Neoplatonist prin- century, with German Lutheran theologians such
ciple of plenitude: the infinite fecundity of the as Gottfried Olearius and Johann Lorenz von
Cause should be reflected in an infinity of effects. Mosheim. Both authors describe Neoplatonism as
But here again, he rejected the idea, found in an eclectic mix that has little in common with the
Patrizi and other Neoplatonists, that infinite space philosophy of the original founder of the
is filled with incorporeal light or ether. Rather, he Academy. This did not mean that these theolo-
stressed the physical continuity of this infinite gians had much sympathy for Plato himself.
world. In his epistemology, on the other hand, Especially Mosheim repeated the well-known
Bruno adopted Neoplatonist speculations con- Protestant invective against the pernicious
cerning the soul’s ascent through the different influence of all pagan learning, and Platonism in

--- Page 269 ---
845 NEOPLATONISM III: SINCE THE RENAISSANCE
particular, on Christianity. In so doing they con- mann’s alternative account is heavily influenced by
tinued Luther’s campaign for a return to the pure Kant’s crititical philosophy, which he strongly
and unspoiled evangelical truth. In this sense, both favoured. Furthermore, Tennemann subscribed to
Olearius and Mosheim reiterated the criticism the ancient idea that Plato had had a secret, eso-
voiced by the anonymous Le Platonisme dévoilé teric doctrine that had only been transmitted
of 1700, which stated that all Fathers of the orally to his pupils. Fragments of this Unge-
Church had succumbed to Platonism, thus cor- schriebene Lehre could supposedly be found in
rupting the true faith. Although Olearius and Aristotle and in the (fragmentary) writings of the
Mosheim no longer accepted the identification of members of the first Academy. Traditionally, the
Platonism and Neoplatonism found in this book, religious and mystical elements of Plato’s esoteric
they largely agreed with most of its conclusions. doctrine had been seen as the very core of his
Their attack against Neoplatonism also had a con- teaching, of which the Dialogues were but a faint,
fessional character. Many Protestant authors popularizing echo. In the Introduction to his
claimed that the introduction of papal bizarreries groundbreaking translation of Plato published in
such as the Transubstantiation had largely re- 1804, Friedrich Schleiermacher strongly repudiat-
sulted from the acceptance by theologians of ed this kind of esoteric reading, urging his readers
Platonic and Aristotelian metaphysics. In many to interpret Plato solely on the basis of his
cases the onslaught by such Protestant authors on Dialogues. Schleiermacher thus confirmed the
Neoplatonism included an overall rejection of the decline of the Neoplatonic reading of Plato that
entire domain nowadays referred to as Western > had begun almost a century earlier.
esotericism: including — alchemy, Paracelsian From the period of the early roth century on, it
medicine [> Paracelsianism], and > magic. The becomes particularly difficult, if not impossible, to
distinction between Plato and Neoplatonism that trace the continuation of Neoplatonism as a tradi-
had been operated by Olearius and Mosheim for tion in its own right. Important is the role that
theological reasons was adopted by Jacob Brucker was played by Thomas Taylor (1758-1835), nick-
in his highly influential Critical History of named “the English Platonist”, whose translations
Philosophy (first edition 1742-1744), one of the of Iamblichus, Plotinus, Porphyry and Proclus
first modern histories of philosophy. Just like his brought the works of these philosophers to the
predecessors, Brucker considered the Neoplato- attention of English readers. Taylor has been held
nists as ravingly mad impostors. However, as a in great esteem by authors associated with esoteric
historian of philosophy, he not only faithfully traditions since the 18th century, from the painter
described the Neoplatonists’ main opinions but and poet > William Blake to the theosophist
also tried to explain their origins, which according scholar ~ G.R.S. Mead and to zoth-century
to him could be found in Oriental philosophy. admirers of Neoplatonic philosophy such as — to
Neoplatonist monism, the thesis that all being, give one example — the authors contributing to
including matter, emanates from God, stands in David Fideler’s journal Alexandria: The Journal of
stark contrast to Platonic and Christian dualism. the Western Cosmological Traditions. In the latter
Brucker’s epoch-making innovation was to recon- context, Neoplatonism tends to be closely associ-
struct Plato’s “system” on the basis of his dia- ated with Orphic and Pythagorean traditions, and
logues alone, which he found a difficult task given perceived first and foremost as a “sacred cosmol-
Plato’s notorious obscurity and his poetic style. ogy”; it is admired for its harmonious beauty and
Although Brucker’s reconstruction fails to impress is seen as a source of inspiration for those who
the modern scholar, the very fact that he devel- seek alternatives to the worldviews dominant
oped a critical interpretation of Plato independent in contemporary Western culture. Not much re-
of Neoplatonist sources is significant in itself. The search has been done so far on the discreet
same project was taken up by Wilhelm Gottlieb presence since Taylor’s times, and independent of
Tennemann in his System der Platonischen academic philosophy, of such spiritually-inclined
Philosophie (1792-1795), which can be consid- enthusiasts of Neoplatonism, or on the influence
ered the first modern monograph on Plato. Just of their networks and publications.
like Brucker, Tennemann claimed that Plato had That Neoplatonism is of central importance for
elaborated a philosophical system that could be understanding -*> Romanticism has been recog-
reconstructed on the basis of the Dialogues. He nized by historians for a long time, but only more
did not, however, agree with Brucker’s particular recently has the recognition gained ground that
reconstruction of that system; instead, Tenne- what was covered under that label actually

--- Page 270 ---
NEOPLATONISM III: SINCE THE RENAISSANCE 846
included much that would nowadays be asso- Romantisme Francais, Paris: Klincksieck, 1971 ¢
ciated with hermetic philosophy, the occult R. Klibansky, The Continuity of the Platonic Tradi-
tion during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance,
sciences, and Western esotericism in general
Munich, r98r ¢@ E.N. Tigerstedt, “The Decline and
(Abrams 1971; Hanegraaff 1998). The broad cul-
Fall of the Neoplatonic Interpretation of Plato: An
tural influence that Romanticism has exerted in Outline and Some Observations”, Commentationes
many domains outside philosophy proper — art Humanarum Litterarum 52 (1974), 3-108.
and literature, but esotericism as well — means
that, ever since the early roth century, one may CEES LEIJENHORST
encounter “neoplatonic” motives and associated
modes of thinking in so many places that a syn- Neo-Sufism
thetic overview becomes a practical impossibility.
For example, while Neoplatonism is clearly of the This term is used to refer to religious movements
greatest importance for understanding a theo- in the West which describe themselves as “Sufi” but
sophical worldview [~ Theosophical Society] as are part of the landscape of Western esotericism
presented by > H.P. Blavatsky (see e.g. Ellwood more than of Islam. Such a use should be distin-
1983), it is mixed up there in a highly complex guished from the standard use of the term in
manner with so many other elements that the Islamic studies, where it denotes a particular group
result is, rather, something new. The continuing of Sufi orders which arose in the Islamic world
attraction and relevance of “neoplatonism”, but between the 18th and roth centuries and which has
also its increasing elusiveness, is clearly demon- no important connection with the West.
strated by the publications of the International Persons and groups in the West describing them-
Society for Neoplatonic Studies and the series of selves as “Sufi” may be placed into one of three
collective volumes it has published since 1976: categories: Islamic Sufism, non-Islamic neo-Sufism,
here one finds discussions of Neoplatonism in and partly Islamic neo-Sufism. Islamic Sufism
relation to religions such as Hinduism, Judaism, (which falls beyond the scope of this entry) has been
Christianity, Islam, and > Gnosticism, but also present in one form or another in the Islamic world
applied to subjects as varied as biology, ecology, since the 7th century and in the Christian West since
democracy, psychology, and aesthetics. Finally, at least the 18th century, at which time branches of
“neoplatonic” frameworks are clearly present in mainstream Sufi orders existed in some of the small
various worldviews associated with the > New communities of Arab sailors resident in certain
Age movement, from channeled books such as A European ports. Since the first quarter of the 2oth
Course in Miracles and the “Seth Messages” pub- century, there have also been Sufi groups in the West
lished by > Jane Roberts, to the transpersonal whose membership is not restricted to particular
psychology of Ken Wilber (see e.g. Hanegraaff ethnic or immigrant communities, and which may
1996/1998, 120-127, 246-252). include converts to Islam from Christianity or
Judaism. Despite their location in the West and the
Lit.: M.H. Abrams, Natural Supernaturalism: Tradi- pragmatic concessions to Western realities that they
tion and Revolution in Romantic Literature, New
may make in some details of belief and practice,
York & London: W.W. Norton, 1971 ¢ B. Copen-
such groups are Sufi rather than neo-Sufi.
haver and Ch.B. Schmitt, “Platonism”, in: Renais-
sance Philosophy, Oxford, 1992, 127-195 # Robert S. Neo-Sufism first became important in the West in
Ellwood, “The American Theosophical Synthesis”, non-Islamic form, presenting Sufism as a “truth”
in: Howard Kerr & Charles L. Crow (eds.), The distinct from Islam (for Islamic Sufis, Sufism is an
Occult in America: New Historical Perspectives, integral part of Islam). The earliest non-Islamic
Urbana & Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1983 neo-Sufi was Hazrat Inayat Khan (1882-1927),
¢ G. Garfagnini (ed.), Marsilio Ficino e il ritorno di
who was born in Baroda, India, into a family of
Platone: Studi e documenti, Florence, 1986 « W.J.
Indian Muslim musicians, and joined the Chishti Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture:
Esotericism in the Mirror of Secular Thought, Leiden, order in his youth. He travelled to the United
New York, Koln: E.J. Brill, t996/Albany: State Uni- States in 1910, at the age of 28, and lectured ini-
versity of New York Press, 1998 @ idem, “Roman- tially on Indian music in San Francisco. He soon
ticism and the Esoteric Connection”, in: Roelof van gathered a small group of followers interested
den Broek & Wouter J. Hanegraaff (eds.), Gnosis and more in his spiritual than his musical teaching.
Hermeticism from Antiquity to Modern Times,
After moving from the United States to London, he
Albany: State University of New York Press, 1998,
237-268 ¢ J. Hankins, Plato in the Italian Renais- published A Sufi Message of Spiritual Liberty in
sance, Leiden: E.J. Brill, t991 # Brian Juden, Tradi- 1914, in 1915 started a magazine, The Sufi, and in
tions orphiques et tendances mystiques dans le 1916 established a “Sufi Order”. He continued to

--- Page 271 ---
847 NEO-SUFISM
write on Indian music and its spiritual significance, century by descendants of Inayat Khan, and both
but was best known as a “Sufi” teacher. In 1920 he acquired their own following in the United States,
moved from England to France, and he set up a especially on the west coast, as well as in other parts
“Sufi Movement” in Geneva in 1923. In 1926 he of the Americas, Europe and Australasia.
moved back to India, where he died the following A second major school of non-Islamic neo-
year. His “Sufi Order” and “Sufi Movement” were Sufism was established by Idries Shah (1924-
by then established in the United States, Britain, 1996). Shah’s father was an Afghan Muslim from
France and Switzerland. an important family, but though Shah was born in
Inayat Khan defined Sufism as “the religion of Simla, India, his mother was a Scot whom his
the heart”, something both above and beyond father had met whilst studying medicine in Edin-
established religions: it was ‘the spirit of Islam, as burgh, and Shah himself was educated and lived
well as the pure essence of all religions and philoso- mostly in England. He was described in his Daily
phies’. A believer in the essential unity of all major Telegraph obituary as ‘in speech and bearing...
religions, he instituted “Universal Worship” for his the epitome of Englishness’, and was a Governor of
followers, to ‘unite the followers of different reli- the Royal Humane Society and of the Royal Hos-
gions and faiths in wisdom, so that without having pital and Home for Incurables, two eminently
to give up their own religion they may strengthen “establishment” English bodies. Shah began pub-
their own faith and focus the true light upon it’. lishing in 1956 with Oriental Magic, followed in
Universal Worship included texts drawn from six 1957 by The Secret Lore of Magic: Books of the
religions (Hinduism, Buddhism, Zoroastrianism, Sorcerers and Destination Mecca. His most impor-
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam). Inayat Khan’s tant work, The Sufis, was published in 1964,
followers were also taught various invocations and with an introduction by the British novelist and
meditative practices which were sometimes taken poet Robert Graves (1895-1985). Another literary
from Islamic Sufism, and sometimes from Hin- admirer of Shah’s, the British novelist Doris Less-
duism or generalized Western spirituality. ing (b. 1919), described The Sufis as ‘the most sur-
After Inayat Khan’s death, his following split prising book I had read, and yet it was as if I had
between his family in Europe and his two leading been waiting to read just that book all my life’. In
followers in the United States, Rabia Martin 1965, Shah founded the Institute for Cultural
(2-1947) and Samuel Lewis (1896-1971). Martin Research ‘to study, educate and publish in the field
and Lewis together led the “Sufi Order” in the of human thought’, and then a publishing house,
United States until 1945, when Martin and some Octagon Press. Octagon published Shah’s books
followers left neo-Sufism for the neo-Hindu teach- once they had gone out of print with general pub-
ings of Meher Baba (1894-1969), thought to be lishers, as well as a range of translations of major,
an avatar. This group became known as “Sufism classic Sufi writers.
Reoriented”, while the remainder (Lewis’s group) Unlike Inayat Khan, Shah never established him-
later became known as the “Sufi Islamia Ruhaniat self as the leader of a large, formal group of disci-
Society” (“Islamia Ruhaniat”, literally “Islamic ples. Although according to some accounts he had
spirituality”, being translated as ‘the way of peace joined the Naqshbandi order, Shah laid no stress on
through the breath’). In the late 1960s, Samuel receipt of authority from living Sufis. His personal
Lewis added “Dances of Universal Peace” to the teaching was restricted to periodic “supper ses-
practices inherited from Inayat Khan, attracting sions” attended by about thirty people at a time,
large numbers of the “love generation”, and the and to an extensive correspondence. His impor-
Sufi Islamia Ruhaniat Society later added the God- tance lies not so much in his direct disciples as in his
dess Tradition, Taoism, and “the Native Traditions books: by the time of Shah’s death in 1996, The
of the world” to the original six religions recog- Sufis and another twenty or so books had sold 15
nized during “Universal Worship”. million copies in twelve languages.
In Europe, Inayat Khan’s following was led by Like Inayat Khan, Shah separated Sufism from
various members of Inayat Khan’s family until 1958 Islam, maintaining (in the words of Doris Lessing)
when, on the death of Muhammad Ali Khan (a that ‘the Sufi truth is at the core of every religion,
cousin), the “Sufi Movement” based in Geneva and its heart, and religions are only the outward vest-
the “Sufi Order” based in London became inde- ments of an inner reality’. The Islamic Sufi content
pendent of each other. The Sufi Movement tended of his books, however, is far higher than that of
to emphasize “universal mysticism”, while the Sufi the teachings of Inayat Khan. Several of Shah’s
Order tended to emphasize its Sufi, Chishti, creden- books are essentially anthologies of texts chosen
tials. Both groups were led until the start of the 21st from classic Sufi sources (with which he was well

--- Page 272 ---
NEO-SUFISM 848
acquainted), supplemented by folk tales which his mid twenties, probably in 1898-1899. On his
Shah collected from across Asia as a young man, return to Germany in 1913 he became involved
especially the sayings attributed to the mythical with a variety of esoteric organizations, notably the
Mulla Nasr al-Din. The almost exclusively Islamic Germanen Order. He founded the Thule Society in
content and inspiration of his works might justify 1917-1918, and in 1918 gave instructions for the
the description of Shah as a Sufi writer addressing establishment of the Deutsche Arbeiterpartei, a
a Western audience, were it not for Shah’s own political group which in r919 was joined by Adolf
disavowal of mainstream Islam, the lack of a Hitler, who transformed it into the Nazi party.
significant link to an Islamic Sufi order, and the Aguéli, a Swedish painter resident mostly in France
absence of normal Islamic practice from his imme- who had previously been a member of the > Theo-
diate circle. sophical Society, joined a very minor branch of the
Non-Islamic neo-Sufism was also an element Shadhiliyya order in Egypt in 1907, at the age of
in the > Gurdjieff Tradition. Both > George Gur- 38. On his return to Paris he wrote on aspects of
djieff and > P.D. Ouspensky alluded frequently to Islam in esotericist journals, and when he admitted
their Sufi contacts, as did other Gurdjieff teachers + René Guénon into the Shadhiliyya order in 1912
such as the Englishman J.G. Bennett (1897-1974), this was more in the spirit of giving an esoteric ini-
who visited Sufis in the Islamic world and from tiation than in the spirit of Islamic Sufism.
1963-1966 followed Idries Shah, and Oscar Ichazo From the time of his emigration from France to
(1931-), a Chilean follower of Ouspensky who Egypt in 1930 at the age of 44, Guénon was a Sufi
established the Arica Institute in New York in 1971 rather than a neo-Sufi, but both Sufism and partly
and was instrumental in the popularization of the Islamic neo-Sufism are found amongst the various
Enneagram (often said to have a Sufi origin), first as groups established by adherents of his version of
a technique for personality testing and then in the Philosophia Perennis [> Tradition]. The most
other applications. important of these groups, the Maryamiyya, is con-
Partly Islamic neo-Sufism has always been found sidered by many to display neo-Sufi characteristics.
in the Islamic world, and emerged in the West The Maryamiyya was established by > Frithjof
only shortly after non-Islamic neo-Sufism. Partly Schuon, who joined the Alawiyya order of Ahmad
Islamic neo-Sufism is an intermediate category, ibn Mustafa al-Alawi (1869-1934) in Algeria in
comprising those groups and individuals which 1932 at the age of 25, and on this basis established
maintain the link between Sufism and Islam, but a following of his own, principally in Switzerland,
are nonetheless sectarian in the sense that they have France, and the United States. He gradually
characteristics of belief or practice which would be modified the practice of the Alawiyya and later
condemned by the vast majority of Islamic Sufis. renamed his own group the “Maryamiyya”.
Partly Islamic neo-Sufism is often more difficult to Schuon’s belief in the “transcendent unity of reli-
identify than non-Islamic neo-Sufism, since partly gions” led to the adoption of concepts and prac-
Islamic neo-Sufis do not declare themselves as such, tices from outside Islam, notably Hindu concepts
usually claiming to be part of the Islamic Sufi tra- such as avatar, Christian imagery such as icons of
dition. A second difficulty is that the difference the Virgin Mary (after whom the Maryamiyya was
between partly Islamic neo-Sufism and Islamic named), and Native American practices such as the
Sufism is often one of degree, so that the border Rite of the Sacred Pipe. Attempts were made to
between the two is not always clear. In both the keep these elements separate from the Islamic prac-
Islamic world and the West, Islamic Sufi groups are tice of the Maryamiyya proper, but for at least
often accused of beliefs or practices which bring on some of Schuon’s followers non-Islamic elements
them general condemnation; some of these groups acquired a significance which would justify the
are really neo-Sufi, and some are not. appellation of neo-Sufism rather than Sufism.
The earliest partly Islamic neo-Sufis in the West Other followers of Schuon’s, many of whom occu-
were individuals who joined Sufi orders in the pied prominent positions in academia and the pub-
Islamic world but subsequently used Sufism as lic eye, have been mainstream Islamic Sufis. Some
one element in a personal amalgam more related of these established Sufi groups of their own after
to Western esotericism than to Islamic Sufism. breaking with Schuon, among which was the
Amongst these were Rudolf Freiherr von Sebotten- Alawiyya established in France by the Rumanian
dorff (1875-1945) and Ivan Aguéli (1869-1917). diplomat Michel Valsan (1907-74), a one-time
Sebottendorff, a German who took Ottoman citi- disciple of Schuon’s. This group was a model of
zenship and had previously been active in > Islamic orthodoxy.
Freemasonry, joined a Sufi order in Turkey while in Later partly Islamic neo-Sufi groups range from

--- Page 273 ---
849 NEO-TEMPLAR TRADITIONS
the barely Islamic to the almost Islamic. At I’Islam, Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1976 # Samuel L.
one extreme is the Mauritian merchant Paul de Lewis, Sufi Vision and Initiation: Autobiographical
Séligny (1903-?), whose small group in Monaco Writings of Samuel L. Lewis, San Francisco: Sufi
Islamia, 1986 # Yves Camicas & Claude Camicas, Les
and the south of France followed him during the
Gens du blame: Une secte au quotidien [on de Séligny],
1960s through successive incarnations as neo-Sufi
Milan: Arché, 1995 ¢ H.J. Witteveen (ed.), The Heart
shaykh, Hindu guru, newspaper proprietor and of Sufism: Essential Writings of Hazrat Inayat Khan,
finally reforming educationalist. At the other Boston: Shambhala, 1999.
extreme are groups which remain close to Islamic
Sufism even though they explicitly state that their Lit.: Alan Godlas, “Sufism’s Many Paths”, http://
members need not be Muslim. Prominent among www.arches.uga.edu/~godlas/Sufism.html ¢ The En-
cyclopaedia of Islam, Leiden etc.: E.J. Brill, 1986 -
these is the Threshold Society, established in Cali-
[various entries on Islamic Sufism] ¢ Jean-Pierre Lau-
fornia in the early 1990s by Edmund Helminski rant, Le Sens caché selon René Guénon, Lausanne:
(1947-) and his wife Camille Adams (1951-), both LAge d’homme, 1975 ¢ Andrew Rawlinson, “A His-
translators of Jalal al-Din Rumi (1207-1273), the tory of Western Sufism”, Diskus 1:1 (1993), 45-83 ¢
founder of the Mevlevi order and in the 1990s one idem, The Book of Enlightened Masters: Western
of America’s best-selling poets. Helminski, who is Teachers in Eastern Traditions, Chicago: Open Court,
1997 Mark Sedgwick, Against the Modern World:
himself Muslim, joined the Mevlevi order in
Traditionalism and the Secret Intellectual History of
Turkey and was recognized there as a Mevlevi
the Twentieth Century, New York: Oxford University
shaykh in 1990, but allowed non-Muslims to join Press, 2004 ¢ idem, “Sects in the Islamic World”, Nova
his own Mevlevi group in the United States. Unlike Religio 3 (2000), 195-240 # Viveca Wessel, Ivan
non-Islamic neo-Sufis, Helminski recognized the Aguéli: Portratt av en rymd, Stockholm: Forfattarférl,
Islamic nature of Sufism, adopting a subtle position 1988.
which held that a Mevlevi Sufi need not ‘embrace
the religion of Islam in its outer, sociological form’ MARK SEDGWICK
so long as, for example, he studied the Quran
and the hadith. The possibility that a Mevlevi Neo-Templar Traditions
might become a Muslim in form as well as
“essence” is not excluded, and Helminski describes If classic historiographical methods are re-
the Threshold Society as ‘a bridge towards Islamic spected, there is no reason to believe that the Order
practice’. Similarly close to Islam was the Sri of Templars survived in any fashion after its aboli-
Lankan Tamil Bawa Muhaiyaddeen (c. 1900- tion by Pope Clement V in 1314. The Templars
1986), who founded the Bawa Muhaiyaddeen who survived the stake or prison probably joined
Fellowship in Philadelphia after he travelled, other knightly or religious orders, or returned
already an old man, to the United States in 1971. to lay status as soldiers or feudal landowners.
Bawa maintained that Sufism was a ‘path beyond Absolutely no medieval document suggests even a
all religions’ but followed and led many of his fol- residual survival of the “Order of the Poor Knights
lowers in a practice that was essentially Islamic, of Christ”. It is naturally hazardous to make con-
including for example the five daily prayers and jectures about what the Templars’ destiny might
the Ramadan fast. Neither group has important have been, if it had not been shattered by the joint
sources of doctrine or practice from outside Islam, interests of the pope and the king of France. His-
and groups such as these are close to Islamic tory cannot be remade! But one may imagine it as
Sufism. being little different from that of similar orders,
such as the Hospitallers of Saint John (the Knights
Hazrat Inayat Khan, Sufi Message ofSpiritual Liberty, of Malta) or the Order of Saint-Lazare. The Order
London, 1914 ¢ idem, The Unity of Religious Ideals, of Malta became in the 17th and 18th centuries
London: The Sufi Movement, 1929 # René Guénon,
what it has remained to this day: an essentially
“Et-Tawhid”, Le Voile d’lsis, July 1930 @ idem, “Le
Soufisme”, Le Voile d’Isis, August-September 1934 nobiliary and charitable institution. Saint-Lazare
¢ idem, “Lésotérisme islamique”, Cahiers du Sud was annexed by the French sovereigns and became
264 (1947) # These and other articles are reprinted an order of the King: a national decoration com-
in Guénon, Apercus sur l’ésotérisme islamique et plete with a structure for distributing pensions to
le Taoisme (Roger Maridort, ed.), Paris: Gallimard, his favored subjects. This was what happened to
1973 ¢ Idries Shah, The Sufis, London: Octagon Press,
the one and only Templar branch that survived
1964 ¢ idem, Learning How to Learn: Psychology and
abolition, thanks to the protection of the kings Spirituality in the Sufi Way, London: Octagon Press,
1978 @ Frithjof Schuon, De l’unité transcendante des of Portugal. At first only the name changed, but
religions, Paris: Gallimard, 1968 ¢ idem, Comprendre over the centuries the “Order of Christ” was also

--- Page 274 ---
NEO-TEMPLAR TRADITIONS 850
transformed into a national decoration. It is nowa- there must have been few 18th-century libraries
days one of the prestigious decorations of the (sec- lacking one or more works on chivalry, whether
ular) Portuguese Republic, particularly awarded to romances or treatises. Thus one is not surprised to
foreign dignitaries. find in the library of the Comte de Clermont,
Similarly, for the medievalists there is no docu- Grand Master of French ~ Freemasonry from
ment to suggest that the Templars professed any- 1743 to 1771, Amadis de Gaule, Histoire du
thing but the orthodox Catholic faith, for which Chevalier du Soleil (History of the Knight of the
they had fought hard for two hundred years, and Sun), Histoire de Bertrand du Guesquelin, and also
especially no esoteric concepts. The grave accusa- Abbé Vertot’s Histoire de Malte (History of Malta),
tion of heresy that was first made when they of whose four large volumes more than one is
appeared before the tribunals was nothing but the devoted to the Templars.
typical trial procedure of the time, in which the Modern speculative Freemasonry, formed in
accused was condemned in advance. Thus nothing London from 1717 onwards, took root in France
in actual history anticipates the fabulous and leg- around 1725. It probably worked the two degrees
endary destiny that the Order of Knights Templar inherited from the operative masonry of Scotland,
would enjoy, centuries after their disappearance. Entered Apprentice and Fellow-Craft, adding in
The secret survival of the Templars was originally the 1730s a third grade called Master Mason.
an exclusively masonic myth, but in the course of Between this time and 1760, the French freemasons
three hundred years it spread far beyond the world discovered other degrees and put them into prac-
of the lodges. It is a rare example of a masonic leg- tice. The three first degrees (Apprentice, Fellow-
end becoming the direct source of a classic figure of Craft or Compagnon, and Master) are called
the Western imagination. “blue” or “symbolic” in the French masonic tradi-
The “true” Templars thus disappeared between tion, and “craft” degrees in British masonry. The
1310 and 1320. Chivalry itself, of which they had other degrees have become known in France as
been among the most illustrious representatives, “hauts-grades” or “écossisme” (“Scottish”), and
only survived them for a few decades and gradually as “side degrees” in Great Britain - names which
faded away during the second half of the 14th are incorrect in the literal sense, but firmly estab-
century; but the ideal — or to use a neutral term, lished by usage. These other degrees became one of
the imaginary world — of chivalry survived them. the favorite forms of expression in the spiritualist
This very persistence of the chivalric imagination and esoteric currents which developed during the
through the centuries is a most unusual phenome- 18th century. Souls in quest of the chivalric ideal,
non in the history of ideas. Whilst the romances of Hermetic secrets, or divine mysteries turned to
chivalry lost their literary status in the 15th and these rituals with their alluring names such as “Per-
16th centuries, they continued to be read, as fect Master”, “Elect”, “Knight of the Orient”,
testified by countless editions up to the 18th cen- “Rose-Croix”, and of course “Knight of the Tem-
tury. The other element that illustrates and sup- ple”. The emergence and nature of these masonic
ports the vitality of chivalry in the French high degrees is one of the most obscure and sur-
imagination of the 17th and 18th centuries is the prising aspects of the Age of Reason’s hidden side.
steady interest in the military orders and their his- The high degrees thus became the route by which
tory, as shown by the copious bibliography of the chivalric imagination, and consequently the
“treatises”. The history of the improbable number Templar legend, invaded Freemasonry.
of knightly orders, as presented in them, is in fact a In France, the first high degrees probably ap-
unique history: that of the persistent battle waged peared during the 1730s, from which time some
by certain people throughout the centuries to main- took Freemasonry itself to be a knightly order.
tain the ideal of chivalry. If they speak at length Ramsay, in his celebrated Discourse of 1736,
about the facts, often epic and sometimes mysteri- explained that masons are the descendants of the
ous, which explain the creation of these orders, it is Crusaders. From the moment that Freemasonry
because of what those circumstances teach about was associated with chivalry, especially if this was
the nature of this knight’s battle against human the chivalry of the Crusades, the Templars were not
contingencies, the forces of evil or destiny. Another far off. In 1737 we read in a gazette: ‘A new Order
indication of the importance of the symbolic level has been founded in Paris which comes from Eng-
in these works appears in the long descriptions of land and is called... Free-Masons. Those of this
coats of arms, chains of office, and costumes attrib- Order take an oath of fidelity . . . and it is somewhat
uted to the various orders. In view of the large like the Order of the Templars’. In 1746, L’Examen
number of books in this field published up to 1730, de la Société des Francs-Macons . . . (Examination

--- Page 275 ---
851 NEO-TEMPLAR TRADITIONS
of the Society of Freemasons) explained that ‘The nected by its symbolic theme to the degree of Mas-
Free-Masons, like the Templars, have points that ter. It was thus known to all masons, perhaps as
are so essential and secret between them that they early as the beginning of the 1730s. Now, the ritual
would rather die than reveal them’. In another of Knight Kadosh of the Ordre Sublime des Cheva-
example of 1752, Les vrais jugemens sur la société liers Elus gives us something more, revealing a
des Francs-Magons . . . (The True Judgments about secret part of the degree of Elu: this degree, which
the Society of Freemasons), we read that ‘in consid- everyone in the masonry of the first half of the 18th
ering the last state of [the sect of] the Templars, it century thought he knew, is in fact the vestige and
seems that it has revived completely in that of the the survival of one of the most illustrious orders
Masons’. Thus from the 1740s onwards, public of chivalry - a Sublime Order, but extinguished
opinion forged a link between the masonic myster- through an injustice. On closer examination, the
ies which were beginning to be the talk of the town legend of the degree of Chevalier Elu contains sev-
and the Order of the Temple. Lastly, we cite the eral other elements. First, the Chevaliers Elus are
memoirs of the great archivist of French masonry the descendants of the Templars who have survived
in the 18th century, > Jean-Baptiste Willermoz: secretly into the 18th century. Secondly, the Order
‘... from the year 1752, ... having been chosen to of the Temple was itself nothing but the prolonga-
preside over the [lodge] that had received me, .. . I tion of a long line of initiates. The third and most
mysteriously told those on whom I conferred this important element is that it was in Scotland, and
4th degree of the [lodge] that they were becoming around the tragic destiny of the House of Stuart,
successors of the Knights T[emplar] and of their that the Ordre Sublime survived.
knowledge; I repeated it, and have repeated it for This legend reappears in the most famous of the
ten years, as I heard it from my predecessor, who Templar masonic systems of the Enlightenment,
had heard it himself from an ancient tradition, the “Templar” Strict Observance which arose in
whose origin he did not know’. Germany during the 1750s around Baron von
By the 1740s, and perhaps earlier, some masons Hund (1722-1776), who was its emblematic figure
were claiming a filiation with the Knights Templar, for a quarter of a century. After the three degrees of
so prestigious and rich in symbolic potential. The symbolic Freemasonry, the brethren were invited to
appearance of the “Templar” high degrees and the join the “Inner Order” with two degrees of Novice
enthusiasm for them on the part of the brethren in and Knight Templar. It was then revealed to them
turn nourished and amplified the legend. The birth that authentic Freemasonry in fact concealed a sur-
of the Templar degrees is one of the most obscure vival of the Order of the Temple, governed in
subjects, on which new information has only just an occult manner by “Unknown Superiors”. The
been discovered: it appears that a Templar high Templar Strict Observance enjoyed great success in
degree, the “Ordre Sublime des Chevaliers Elus”, Germany, where it dominated masonic life during
was actually created before 1750 in Stuartist the 1760s and 1770s. Grouped into “provinces”,
circles. What “rare and precious knowledge” did these new Templars modelled their organization on
this archaic ritual of the Knight Kadosh convey? what they thought they knew of the medieval
On first reading, the masonic student feels a certain order’s administration. Thus, interpreting the texts
disappointment: far from new revelations, it all has with some freedom, France harbored the Province
an air of déja-vu. In fact, it is nothing but a ritual of of Burgundy based at Strasbourg (sic), that of
the “Elu des Neuf”, one of the earliest and com- Auvergne at Lyon, and that of Septimanie at Mont-
monest degrees of the 18th century, which someone pellier. The Strict Observance was established in
has decked out in knightly dress and equipped with France in 1774, first at Strasbourg, then at Lyon. At
a “mysterious ladder” — and a rather curious leg- the end of the 1770s, the question of the veracity
end in which the Templars figure. One cannot and nature of Templar filiation caused a serious cri-
avoid the feeling that it is a montage, or even cob- sis. The Convents of Lyon (1778) and Wilhelmsbad
bled together. But these are the thoughts of a 21st- (1782) brought about its mutation into the Régime
century analyst. Placed in the masonic context of Ecossais Rectifié. The Inner Order renounced Tem-
the 1740s, it is precisely its proximity to the grade plar filiation (though in quite ambiguous terms),
of Elu, even in its title, which makes the Ordre Sub- and the teaching of the system was laid wide open
lime des Chevaliers Elus significant. This ritual to the theosophic doctrines of the theurgist > Mar-
then appears as an unveiling, and that is its message tinés de Pasqually. Nowadays, the ties between the
and the key to the new perspective that it offers. Ordre Sublime des Chevaliers Elus and the Stricte
The grade of Elu is one of the earliest degrees of Observance Templiére are difficult to discern with
speculative Freemasonry. It is also closely con- precision, but they seem very probable. In any case,

--- Page 276 ---
NEO-TEMPLAR TRADITIONS 852
some of those who, like > Johann August Starck, King of France often caused them to be represented
played a role in the turbulent history of the Strict as precursors of anticlericalism and the democratic
Observance, derived their “Templar” filiation from movements, while the gnosis that they were sup-
the Ordre Sublime des Chevaliers Elus. The Grand posed to have possessed became assimilated to
Priories of the Régime Ecossais Rectifié and the the religion of nature. Following the trend of the
Swedish and Danish masonic orders maintain to age, esotericism and socialism made excellent
this day, in different ways, part of the complicated companions.
heritage of the Strict Observance. The beginning of the r9th century also witnessed
The other major masonic current which has an important event in the destiny of the Templar
claimed descent from the Order of the Temple also legend. Until 1805, neo-Templarism had been
issued from the Ordre Sublime des Chevaliers Elus. closely associated with Freemasonry, but in that
After an apparent eclipse in the 1750s, the degree year there appeared, within the framework of the
of Knight Kadosh became highly successful in Grand Orient de France, “Les Chevaliers de la
Freemasonry during the last third of the 18th cen- Croix”, an “order of the Orient” which, it was
tury. In 1761, the Conseil Supréme des Grands revealed to the initiate, was in fact the survival of
Inspecteurs Grands Elus, Chevaliers Kadosh con- the Order of the Temple. All of this was very clas-
stituted the inner circle governing the First Grand sical, and this new Templar masonic order — organ-
Lodge of France. At that time, it crowned a system ized by ~ Bernard-Raymond Fabré-Palaprat —
of twenty-five high degrees which, after many vicis- differed from its predecessors only by its taste for a
situdes, were increased to thirty-three in 18or. very theatrical Templar ceremony in true First
Even today, the Supreme Councils of the Ancient Empire style, and by an especially pompous set of
Accepted Scottish Rite rule a masonic system titles. But in the months that followed its founda-
whose most eminent degrees rest on the Templar tion, perhaps in consequence of quarrels with the
legend. The Anglo-Saxon countries have a third Grand Orient, the Templars of the “Chevaliers de
variation of Templar masonry, attested to since the la Croix” proclaimed that the true Order of the
18th century. It is very probably of continental ori- Temple had nothing to do with Freemasonry. For
gin, although the question of the origins of the the first time, a neo-Templar order claimed a secret
“Knight Templar” is nowadays very obscure, and survival outside of any masonic framework. This
very little studied. order is at the source of a strange and celebrated
The success and development of the masonic document (and of course apocryphal): the Charte
degrees which, in the 18th century, claimed the her- de Larménius (Charter of Larmenius), which de-
itage of the Order of the Temple, brings us to a ver- scribes the lineage of Grand Masters who secretly
itable legendary cycle in the medieval literary sense. maintained the order after the execution of Jacques
Since 1760, based on the accusation of heresy and de Molay up to the beginning of the roth century.
on an ambiguous phrase of > Cornelius Agrippa, Fabré-Palaprat and his disciples attributed to the
masons have attributed esoteric knowledge to the Templars a whole collection of secret knowledge,
Templars. Naturally it concerned their alchemical notably a (fifth) gospel forgotten by history: the
skill, which supposedly lay at the origin of their Levitikon. Against the fanaticism and superstition
immense wealth. Since then, the versions of their of the Church of Peter in Rome, the Templars were
history have proliferated, each adding to the story said to have preserved the Church of John and the
some new details about the dire end of the unfor- original Christian faith in all its purity. Beside the
tunate knights, the secrets of their survival, and the Order of the Temple, a “Johannite Church of Prim-
mysteries of their occult hierarchy. During the sec- itive Christians” was organized, complete with
ond half of the 18th century, one can see a whole bishops and liturgy. The Ordre du Temple was
imaginary continent arising. highly successful in France during the first half of
High-degree Freemasonry, established in the the r9th century, spreading to Switzerland, Great
18th century, transmitted the Templar degrees to Britain, and several other countries. After 1840 it
posterity, degrees which were very popular among went into decline, fading around 1850 and appar-
Freemasons throughout the rgth century. For ently disappearing completely in the second half of
example, the practice of the degree of Knight the r9th century. Fabré-Palaprat’s Ordre du Tem-
Kadosh never ceased to increase everywhere in ple is at the source — more mythical than real — of
Europe. But while the Templar legend remained several current neo-Templar orders, notably the
much in evidence, it was in quite a different mode one directed from Portugal since the 1950s by de
from that of the 18th century. In the r9th century, Souza-Fontes.
the Templars’ heresy and their opposition to the Having been considered as initiates since the

--- Page 277 ---
853 NEO-TEMPLAR TRADITIONS
middle of the 18th century, the “Templars” found posed heresy of knights familiar with the mysteri-
themselves implicated in the occult revival of the ous Orient: these two traits met in the 18th century
end of the 19th century. The > “Ordo Templi in an unexpected but historic encounter that made
Orientis,” founded by Theodor Reuss and then of the Templars the heralds of a reviving gnosis. The
expanded by > Aleister Crowley, appears to have Templar degrees of Freemasonry served as the
been the inner circle of a whole series of occultist framework and support for this “precious and
organizations. For its promoters, the secret of the secret knowledge” which, in the paradox of the cen-
Templars consisted in nothing less than sexual tury, fascinated the men of the Enlightenment who
magic. The young > René Guénon, during his were critical towards religious institutions but dis-
formative years, participated in an effort to revive satisfied with the emergence of modern rationalism.
the Ordre du Temple, as demanded by the “spirit” As the historians say, “A false idea is a real fact”. It
of Jacques de Molay in the course of a spiritualist matters little whether the survival of the Templars is
séance. Another Order of the Temple, founded in an invention, or not. On the margin of church
Germany just before World War I by > Lanz von orthodoxy and secular history, the Templar legend
Liebenfels (Adolf Lanz), was organized on the created an area welcoming the most varied specula-
principle of the Roman Catholic hierarchy and tions. Since the same causes produce the same
recruited those deemed to be “Aryan heroes”. Lanz effects, the Templars lived on for three centuries in
was one of the primary representatives of the ario- literature and eso-steric movements, protecting
sophic current in Germany [> Ariosophy], racist beneath the folds of their great mantle, for better or
and proto-fascist in character. Several neo-Templar (sometimes) for worse, the “quest” of men who,
orders were created in the second half of the 20th now as then, feel themselves to be strangers in a
century. There was the Order of the Solar Temple, world grown too profane.
founded by the disciples of Jacques Breyer in 1952
in a context of paranormal phenomena reputedly Lit.: Serge Caillet, L’Ordre Rénové du Temple aux
racines du Temple solaire, Paris: Dervy, 1997 @ Robert
observed in the Chateau d’Arginy, near Lyon. In
L.D. Cooper, “The Knights Templar in Scotland, the
1970, Christian Bernard, then Grand Master of the Creation of a Myth”, Ars Quatuor Coronatorum, Lon-
Ancient and Mystical Order of the Rose-Croix don, 2003 # Antoine Faivre, “Miles redivivius: Aspects
(AMORC), founded an Ordre Rénové du Temple of Chivalric Imagination in Eighteenth-Century
after meeting a mysterious “Cardinal Blanc”, in a Alchemy, Freemasonry and Literature” (1st ed. 1984),
modern version of the mythical “Unknown Superi- in: Access to Western Esotericism, Albany, N.Y.: State
University of New York Press, 1994, 177-199 @ Mas-
ors.” In the middle of the 1980s, Luc Jouret and Jo
simo Introvigne, “Ordeal by Fire: The Tragedy of the
di Mambro monopolized two subsidiary branches
Solar Temple”, Religion 25 (1995), 267-283 André
of these two organizations and, following a terrible Kervella & Philippe Lestienne, “Un haut-grade tem-
sequence of events, led part of the membership to plier dans les milieux jacobites en 1750: LOrdre Sub-
collective suicide. lime des Chevaliers Elus”, Renaissance Traditionnelle
Today’s neo-Templar organizations are very 112 (October 1997), 228-251 @ René Le Forestier, La
diverse. A majority of them remains solidly Franc-magonnerie templiere et occultiste aux X VIII et
XIX® siécle, Paris: Arché-Edidit, 2003 (1st ed. 1968)
anchored in the masonic body, of which they
Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke, The Occult Roots of
constitute the high-degree systems. Their neo- Nazism: Secret Aryan Cults and their Influence on
Templarism is very mild, consisting mainly in pro- Nazi Ideology, 3rd ed., London, New York: Tauris
moting the chivalric ideal, often combined with an Parke, 2003, 90-122 ¢ Pierre Mollier, “Imaginaire
interest in gnostic doctrines. Their reference to the Chevaleresque et Franc-magonnerie au XVIII* siécle”,
Templars is essentially symbolic. Outside Freema- Renaissance Traditionnelle 97-98 (April 1994), 2-19;
sonry, several neo-Templar organizations in fact 99 (July 1994), 128-138; roo (October 1994), 208-
223 @ idem, “Des Francs-macgons aux Templiers:
qualify as fantasy orders of knighthood. Others are
Apercus sur la constitution d’une légende au Siécle des
attached to the neo-spiritualist movement, or even Lumiéres”, Symboles et mythes dans les mouvements
to the ~ New Age. Today, outside the esoteric initiatiques et ésotériques: filiations et emprunts
milieu properly so called, belief that the Templars (ARIES, special issue), Neuilly-sur-Seine, Paris: Arché/
survived by virtue of their secret knowledge is La Table d’Emeraude 1999, 93-101 @ idem, “Les rit-
largely sustained in the public mind by popular uels de la Maconnerie templiére, un cycle légendaire au
Siécle des Lumiéres”, Renaissance Traditionnelle 129
best-sellers such as The Temple and the Lodge (by
(January 2002), 29-39 # Peter Partner, The Knights
Michael Baigent and Richard Leigh, London 1989) Templar: Their Myth, Rochester, Vt.: Destiny Books,
or The Hiram Key (by Christopher Knight and 1990 (1st ed. 1981), 89-194.
Robert Lomas, London 1995).
The prestige of an illustrious order, and the sup- PIERRE MOLLIER

--- Page 278 ---
NERVAL 854
Nerval, Gérard de (Gérard Labrunie), ment of the knowledge of all times, history, travel,
P7205. 1808 Paris, | 26:1-105 5 Latis religion, Kabbalah, > astrology, to make the
shades of > Pico della Mirandola, the sage Meur-
French poet and writer. He participated in the sius and ~ Nicholas of Cusa rejoice’. Indeed his
“battle of Hernani” (1830), associated with “Les investigations embraced a wide area, but he surely
Jeunes-France”, and was taken with an invincible did not devote himself to the deep study of > Mar-
passion for the actress Jenny Colon (1808-1842). tinés de Pasqually, of > Boehme and of > Marsilio
Suffering a complete mental breakdown in 1841, Ficino. He was often content to thumb through
he traveled to the Middle East (1843) and upon his compilers and popularizers: > Court de Gébelin,
return survived for ten years on minor jobs in pub- Herbelot (1625-1695), Abbot Villars (1635-1673),
lishing and journalism. He had another breakdown Bekker (1634-1698), Collin de Plancy, etc. He
in 1853 and never fully recovered; he was hospital- drew from the best and the worst, gave his fancy
ized several times in Doctor Blanche’s mental clinic free rein and above all looked for material to stim-
in Passy. A few moments of lucidity allowed him to ulate his imagination. He was enchanted by strange
write his masterpieces: Sylvia (1853), Les filles du words and marveled at the most enigmatic engrav-
feu (1854), and Les Chimeéres (1843-1854). On 26 ings; he thus had a high opinion of Melencolia by
January 1855, just as Aurélia was beginning to be Diirer (1471-1528), Modestie by Lefévre (1798-
published, he was found hanged from the railing of 1864), the astonishing plates in Oedipus Aegypti-
a staircase in rue de la Vieille-Lanterne in Paris. cus by > Kircher and the striking figures of the >
Nerval, in the first page of Illuminés (1852), Tarot. Highly interested in etymology and occult
chapter “La bibliothéque de mon oncle”, traces his geography, he engaged in kabbalistic calculations
taste for the occult back to childhood. It is possible concerning dates, his age and all sorts of numbers
that some works he had discovered very early could that came up by chance. He moved in the world of
have fed his imagination, but he does not give us symbols, developed imaginary genealogical trees,
any titles and we are reduced to conjectures. Simi- and drew composite portraits where for example a
larly, we cannot trace precisely the various stages of woman, a giantess haloed with seven stars, could
his exploration of esotericism. The reading of > symbolize at the same time Diana, the Virgin Mary,
Goethe, whose Faust he translated (1828), and his Artemis, Saint Rosalia and Jenny Colon, the
discovery of Hoffmann (1776-1822) doubtless beloved actress. These approaches are situated
introduced him to > mysticism and awakened his between playful activity and magical operation
thirst for the infinite; he then had a revelation of the without it being possible to favor one attitude over
secret correspondences maintained by poetry, another. However, Nerval was especially fascinated
dreams and madness, three experiences that led by the symbolic richness of > alchemy and there
him to explore invisible and ineffable realities. The is an obvious connection between Les Chiméres
milieu Jeunes-France, the Petit-Cénacle and the (1843-1854) and the Visions hermétiques of >
Hotel du Doyenné that he frequented assiduously Nuysement.
between 1830 and 1835 were not foreign to such Nevertheless, here again, imagination and non-
preoccupations; he let himself be influenced little chalance, deep conviction and authentic belief are
by little by this ambiguous atmosphere where his curiously blended. Gérard uses for example the
latent dementia, which would explode in 1841, Dictionnaire mytho-hermétique of > Pernety the
found sustenance while leading him imperceptibly way others would a rhyming dictionary, by glean-
toward an esoteric and mystical conception of the ing the terms that captivate him in order to intro-
world. His friend George Bell (1824-1899) charac- duce them, here and there, in a sonnet: an
terized his approach very well: ‘Above all he found essentially poetic manner of letting words have the
infinite joy in teaching himself the mysteries of the first initiative. Nevertheless, it does not follow
occult sciences... With scraps of the Kabbalah from this that alchemy was for him only a glossary
[> Jewish Influences], the mystical reveries of > of mysterious terms. He connected it with his inner
Cazotte, some theosophy [> Christian Theosophy] life, and discovered a subtle relationship between
of > Saint-Martin, the scarce works of - Sweden- his own destiny and that of the philosopher’s stone,
borg that were almost unknown, he composed his whose transmutation, in the image of Christ’s Pas-
own theories to explain everything that could have sion, represented for him the ancient spiritual prin-
surprised him...’. ciple according to which one must die in order to be
Moreover, Nerval himself, in Aurélia (1855), reborn. In the metamorphoses of the stone, Nerval
mentioned his favorite readings: ‘an odd assort- relived his own drama, as a metaphor of the drama

--- Page 279 ---
855 NEW AGE MOVEMENT
of the world. Certainly, Nerval was fascinated by > New Age Movement
animal magnetism, black magic, > Illuminism,
gnosis, arithmosophy [~~ Number Symbolism], 1. DOCTRINES AND RITUALS
astrological symbolism and alchemical meanings, (A. HEALING B. CHANNELING
but even if he may have been a Mason, his esoteric Cc. DIVINATION) 2. SOME
knowledge did not make of him an adept bound to SOGIOVOGICALN CHARACTERES DIGS
an immutable doctrine; he was not the faithful dis- PRO O'S En Eek, S Onn EIR KG
ciple of any religion, of any sect, of any obedience, BACKGROUND 4. NEw AGE RELIGION
of any theory. The preface of his translation of Sec- AND MODERNITY 5. WHITHER THE
ond Faust (1840), a true spiritual testament, is in New AGE?
this respect very significant; having recourse to illu-
minist intuitions, he preaches there a syncretism The New Age has emerged during the 1970s and
founded on the unity of religious traditions. This increasingly during the 1980s as a common
quest results in what he calls “modern pantheism”, denominator for a variety of quite divergent con-
of which Goethe is for him the purest representa- temporary popular practices and beliefs. Among
tive. Gérard then becomes intoxicated with the other things, healing, channeling, the interest in
idea that nothing dies, that eternity concentrates, in crystals, varieties of positive thinking and several
a divine synchronism, the whole of universal his- forms of divination [> Divinatory Arts] have been
tory, visible through the eyes of the soul. From linked to this term. The New Age also includes var-
1842 until his death, he would not cease to live ious “alternative” interpretations of history and of
in a world of mysterious correspondences. His the sciences.
sojourn in the Orient (1843) confirmed him in his The term itself originally arose in theosophical
convictions by convincing him that they agreed literature and in UFO cults [> UFO Traditions]
with archetypal realities transcending space and after World War II in connection with the millenni-
time. Isis, Horus, Antaeus, Prometheus, Pandora, alist belief that the world stands at the brink of a
Orpheus, Icarus: all divinities were useful to him, major evolutionary transformation of conscious-
but he retained only what harmonized with his ness, often identified in early New Age literature as
dream, and saw in myth only a tangible expression the Aquarian Age. Many of those sympathetically
of the invisible, of which man, intermittently, can involved in the first years of the New Age move-
perceive the irrefragable presence. ment principally saw the various techniques of
Thus, Nerval borrowed disparate materials from healing, divination etc. as tools in this transforma-
the various secret doctrines. Stimulated by his men- tion. This sense of the term New Age was in the
tal troubles, he retained the most heterogeneous later 1970s and in the 1980s largely superseded by
elements and the most varied symbolic systems a new and expanded meaning. It no longer refers to
to develop a resolutely personal myth, whose a specific movement that expects the coming of a
fulfillment he would pursue until his death. By new age, but refers to a wide array of ideas and
means of an archetypally Romantic approach, he practices, largely united by historical links, a
situated his Self in the heart of his metaphysical shared discourse and an air de famille. The two
concerns and attempted, through the magic of art, uses of the term have been characterized (Hane-
to make real his own spiritual accomplishment: a graaff 1996, 94-103) as the New Age sensu stricto
symbol, in his opinion, of universal salvation. and sensu lato.
Gerard de Nerval, Oeuvres completes, 3 vols., Paris: 1. DOCTRINES AND RITUALS
Gallimard, 1984, 1989, 1993.
We are frail beings, prey to the fear of an un-
Lit.: A. Rolland de Renéville, Lexpérience poétique, certain destiny, the prospect of disease and ulti-
Paris: Gallimard, 1938 # Jean Richer, Nerval et les doc- mately death. Questions prompted by such
trines ésotériques, Paris: Le Griffon d’Or, 1947 # Marie- existential concerns are in most forms of folk reli-
Jeanne Durry, Gérard de Nerval et le Mythe, Paris: giosity answered in an unsystematic fashion, often
Flammarion, 1956 # Jean Richer, Nerval au royaume through a process of bricolage from already avail-
des archétypes, Paris: Minard, 1971 # idem, Gérard de
able narratives and rituals. Much less commonly,
Nerval: Expérience vécue et création ésotérique, Paris:
individuals with a systematizing bent will attempt Guy Trédaniel, 1987 ¢ La Tour Saint Jacques 13-13
(1958), numéro special Gérard de Nerval. to harmonize the various answers to such ques-
tions. In this respect, much of the New Age is
JEAN-LUC FAIVRE indeed a mode of folk religiosity. Illness is

--- Page 280 ---
NEW AGE MOVEMENT 856
explained by pointing at various doctrines that worldviews, the New Age is also an intensely ritu-
underlie healing. Astrologers and other diviners alistic form of religion. The belief that body, mind
attempt to ritualistically foretell the future. Leg- and spirit form a whole and should be treated as
ends of past lives offer the hope that physical death such has led to a profusion of systems of holistic rit-
is not the end, but merely a transition to something ual healing. The idea that there are states of con-
new and perhaps better. However, the concrete sciousness in which it is possible to access spiritual
details of various healing systems, the specific knowledge has led to the emergence of ritualized
views presented by various writers on astrology or means of reaching such states, generally termed
the particular theories of > reincarnation found in “channeling”. The belief in a plan of spiritual evo-
New Age texts can be left vague, and can differ to lution has generated a variety of divinatory tech-
the point of being mutually inconsistent. In the niques to gain insight into this plan. Let us take a
New Age culture, attempts have nevertheless been brief look at these three aspects of New Age ritual.
made to construct a coherent whole from these
answers. More typically, perhaps, the variety of A. HEALING
doctrines and rituals point at an underlying vision Medical anthropology distinguishes disease
that is rarely spelled out in full. An attempt at (which is definable from a biomedical perspective)
reconstructing this underlying vision might include from illness (which is defined from within a given
the following items: local worldview). Although Western forms of com-
1. The entire cosmos is not so much a vast set of plementary medicine certainly also attract clients
material objects as a great, interconnected web of with biomedically definable diseases, the spiritual
meaning. 2. The underlying “stuff” of the cosmos is aspect of healing within a New Age framework
therefore not matter but something intangible, per- typically implies addressing culturally constructed
haps identifiable as consciousness or energy. 3. We states of illness. Indeed, New Age conceptions
humans contain a spark of this energy or con- of health can imply such a high level of physical,
sciousness within us, a resource that we can tap emotional and spiritual functioning that an entire
into in order to change reality and create our own spectrum of social and existential problems, any
worlds. 4. The human being is thus not only a perceived lack of vitality or creativity, even the
material body, but also comprises a mind and a “normality” of everyday life, can be understood in
spiritual element. When ill, one needs to address all terms of a lack of health that stands in need of
of these elements rather than merely treat isolated treatment. The methods employed in healing vary
physical symptoms. 5. Each of us is embarked on a from the laying on of hands to the use of a broad
journey of spiritual development, a development variety of ritual substances and objects. Reiki and
that will not stop at the death of the physical body Therapeutic Touch involve the use of the healer’s
but will continue over many lives. 6. There are bet- hands. Crystal healing presupposes that gems and
ter ways to get to understand the world we live in minerals possess healing properties. Color thera-
and our own place in it than via the intellect. Per- pies and Aura-Soma therapy assume that colors
haps we can gain spiritual insight in flashes of intu- influence physical and spiritual well-being. Bach
ition. Perhaps there are prophetic states in which Flower Remedies attempt to derive similar effects
we can access knowledge from various highly from plants. These ritual methods rely on specific
developed beings, or from a divine part of our cosmological doctrines as well as theories about
selves. A variety of techniques such as > astrology the constitution of the human body. In a kind of
or the > tarot can also have this function. 7. Simi- epistemological circle, the validity of these doctri-
lar insights into the workings of the cosmos and nal claims is in turn commonly derived from the
into our own selves were granted to a number of pragmatic certitude that the various modalities of
ancient cultures, ranging from Egypt and India to ritual healing work. Four such doctrines are com-
the native Americas. 8. Such insights are confirmed mon to a diverse set of practices. Firstly, it is gener-
by the most recent developments of Western sci- ally held that there are normally invisible vital
ence, especially quantum mechanics. 9. Spirituality forces (“energies”) that surround and/or pass
is not a matter of accepting doctrines formulated through the human body, and that the therapist is
by others, but rather a highly individual quest, that able to manipulate these energies. Secondly, the
can (and perhaps should) be based primarily on body is a holistic system. The body as a whole is
personal experience. 10. We can either as individu- mirrored in the feet (reflexology), on the outer ears
als or collectively change the world into a better (as in one modern, Western development of acu-
place by adopting such a spiritual vision. puncture), or in the eyes (iridology). Theories of
Besides comprising a set of doctrinally related Chinese origin, according to which the vital forces

--- Page 281 ---
857 NEW AGE MOVEMENT
flow through channels connecting the diverse parts where human beings are separated from each other
of the body into an integrated whole, have been and from the divine, and where pain, disease and
eagerly embraced by New Age healers. Thirdly, disharmony exist. However, this worldview is in
body and spirit are also part of a whole. By treating reality a projection of our frightened egos. A
the body, the spirit can be healed. Conversely, by Course in Miracles is intended as a manual for peo-
treating the spirit the body is healed. Fourthly, the ple who want to deconstruct this projection.
body has a hidden anatomy. Thus the human aura,
a colored sheath said to enclose the physical body, Cc. DIVINATION
is held to provide clues to the state of the client’s Astrology, which is widespread in the New Age
health. The hidden anatomy is often understood to milieu, obviously predates the emergence of the
comprise seven or more centers of vital force, the New Age by many centuries. However, the inter-
chakras. pretations of the various symbols of the birth chart
have changed considerably, and have become
B. CHANNELING steadily more integrated into the New Age world-
In traditional cultures throughout the world reli- view. Beside a more traditional predictive astrol-
gious specialists have functioned as links between ogy, many contemporary astrologers have given
human beings and what each culture understands their interpretations a strongly psychological im-
to be spiritual reality. The New Age counterpart of print. This new mode of interpretation focuses on
this process of prophetic revelation is generally astrology as a device for inner, spiritual change.
known as channeling. Channeled messages gener- The difficulties encountered in life are explained in
ally convey a synthesis of psychology and religion, terms of lessons to be worked on and absorbed in
a pattern of syncretism that has permeated much the individual’s present life on earth. Tarot cards
Western religious thought in general over the last are possibly the most popular method of divination
century. If there were no experience of fear and within the New Age milieu. The tarot deck consists
guilt, or if the spiritual energy were not blocked, or of two main parts. One part consists of a set of 22
if rationality and materialism were not the obsta- numbered cards with pictures, the Major Arcana.
cles that they are to intuitive thought, human The rest of the set, the Minor Arcana, consists of 56
beings would recognize their true, spiritual cards divided into four suits: cups, wands, penta-
natures. A second credo that permeates much of cles and swords. Each card is connected with its
the channeled material of the New Age is that we specific interpretations; in a spread, a number of
create our own reality. If guilt or fear burdens us, cards together are said to give a picture of the
our world will be dark and frightening. If we bring client’s situation as well as his or her direction of
out our divine selves, the world will become filled change. Other forms of divination with a follow-
with seeming miracles. In some sectors of the New ing in the New Age milieu include consulting the
Age, these miracles include the creation of affluence Chinese I Ching or Book of Changes, and the use of
through spiritual means. These basic doctrinal ele- runes.
ments were at the core of an early series of chan-
neled messages, known as the Seth material. > Jane 2. SOME SOCIOLOGICAL
Roberts’ books containing the messages of the dis- CHARACTERISTICS
carnate entity Seth spread through the emerging The New Age manifests a number of characteris-
New Age network throughout the late 1960s and tic splits between emic and etic views of this form
early 1970s, and became trend-setting for subse- of religiosity. Firstly, New Agers can be fascinated
quent channeled messages. They also contain a by a worldview that to all intents and purposes is
number of innovative religious ideas and concepts religious, but would never accept the term “reli-
that have been adopted as normative by the wider gion” — associated by them with narrow-minded
New Age culture. institutions and dogmatism — for their own belief
A second, very influential channeled text in the system. Secondly, they perform rituals without
contemporary New Age milieu is A Course in Mir- being aware of doing so. Thirdly, many do not
acles. According to the founding legend, this text understand their own beliefs and practices as part
was received by psychologist Helen Schucman of any wider New Age movement, but see them-
(r909-1981) through dictation from an inner selves as having embarked on an individual quest.
voice. This voice was identified as belonging to Finally, New Agers will typically understand their
Jesus. According to A Course in Miracles our own doctrines and rituals as rooted in ancient cul-
everyday image of physical reality is illusory. Our tures, although most of these beliefs and practices
conventional view of the world shows us a place are demonstrably very recent innovations. Many of

--- Page 282 ---
NEW AGE MOVEMENT 858
these apparent contradictions can be linked to the sets them apart from the more skeptically inclined.
basic sociological characteristics of the New Age Others can accuse a powerful materialistic ortho-
culture. doxy for suppressing inopportune truths.
How can New Agers practice what to a scholar People in a minority position may tend to seek
is so obviously a form of religiosity, yet resist any each other’s support. They find common interests,
suggestions that this should be the case? An impor- a social network is built up, and new religious
tant reason is the culture critique inherent in the movements may gradually arise around their com-
New Age worldview. Much of the New Age was mon views. They also become aware of each other’s
formed by the 1960s counter-culture. For many of specialist interests: astrologers meet healers, crystal
the spiritual seekers of those days, the very word enthusiasts read texts produced by channelers.
religion was hopelessly tainted with what they saw Individuals with a firm commitment to these alter-
as church authoritarianism. The term “ritual” car- native doctrines and a strong creative spirit may
ried the unpleasant connotation of mere outward then suggest that all of these ideas have something
appearance and meaningless repetition. Since then in common. To the extent that an interaction and
a linguistic innovation has set apart more individu- an ecumenical spirit exist between these groups,
alistic and fluid beliefs and practices as “spiritual”, creative spokespersons may actively attempt to dis-
and the more fixed as “religious”. cover — or invent — common traits uniting their
Other traits can be linked to the fact that the respective interests. This in turn leads to innova-
New Age is not an organized body of believers led tive syntheses between previously unrelated ideas
by a spiritual hierarchy, who have ideally adopted from the cultic milieu. Thus, tarot readers and
creeds defined by a canon of writings. The loosely astrologers, crystal healers and aura therapists may
adopted New Age beliefs seem to belong to a dif- well conclude that each of them has found his or
ferent kind of religiosity, a cultural “underground” her own way to a common goal of spiritual evolu-
current, named the cultic milieu by Colin Campbell tion, and will see all paths as more or less equally
(1972). The cultic milieu consists of all those vast valid. From there, it is only a small step to creating
numbers of individuals who have adopted a variety mixtures between these doctrines and practices. A
of beliefs that from the majority point of view may creative and entrepreneurial New Ager might thus
seem more or less unorthodox. They have done proclaim that the different cards of the tarot corre-
so with varying degrees of commitment, without spond to the various signs of the zodiac. Some of
expressing them in an organized setting: people these innovations become important new religious
who, for instance, believe in the existence of UFOs, trends, while others remain the more or less idio-
but would never consider joining a UFO “cult”. syncratic products of their originators. Thus ideas,
Campbell suggested that new religious movements practices and movements are born out of the cultic
tend to arise out of the cultic milieu and crystallize milieu. Some thrive, while others disappear after a
around some of its ideas. Such movements have few years to be superseded by new trends.
their life cycles, are born, thrive for a while and will Since the innovative spokespersons of the New
more often than not pass into oblivion after a few Age are deeply immersed in the cultic milieu, they
years. The unorthodox ideas of the cultic milieu, will rarely build their new doctrines and rituals
however, are considerably more constant. from nothing. More commonly, available methods
The cultic milieu can support unrelated and at of healing, divination or channeling will be re-
times even mutually contradictory beliefs, simply formulated or recombined in new ways. In this
because they share certain important characteris- fashion, a historical chain of doctrines and their
tics. For instance, the belief in the messages put predecessors can be traced back in time. However,
forth by psychics, in astrology or in the prophecies New Agers themselves are rarely aware of these
of Nostradamus constitute minority views, they historical links. Thus, a lavishly illustrated Atlas
are ideas that flourish in a society whose institu- of the New Age (ed. Garry Maguire Thompson,
tions take little notice of them, or even attempt to Hauppage NY 1999), directed at the New Age
suppress them. Astrology is not taught in publicly market itself, traces contemporary beliefs back to
funded schools, nor is it applied in health care, a variety of exotic sources, many of which are
enlisted in the process of corporate decision-mak- entirely spurious. Ironically, the actual chain of
ing or invoked in judiciary procedures. People who events and the existence of a long-standing tradi-
want to defend the value of astrology often do so in tion of alternative religiosity in the West are hardly
defiance of the worldview espoused by the major- acknowledged at all. Partly, this can be explained
ity. Some believers may be tempted to explain their by the importance of constructing a venerable tra-
position as the effect of a spiritual awakening that dition as a source of legitimacy. However, the lack

--- Page 283 ---
859 NEW AGE MOVEMENT
of historical awareness is also in part due to the gions and psychology, typical of the New Age
characteristics of the cultic milieu. Priests of most movement as such, gave rise to a variety of prac-
Christian denominations will have several years of tices that have shifted in emphasis over time.
academic study behind them. They will be reason- Roughly, five generations of New Age thought can
ably familiar with the historical background of be correlated with as many decades, beginning
their own faith. Those who practice New Age heal- with the 1950s. (1) The late 19 50s saw the first stir-
ing rituals or work as diviners will, on the contrary, rings within the cultic milieu of a belief in a coming
typically have no other education in their own field new age. A variety of small movements arose,
than a few short, privately run courses and varying revolving around revealed messages from beings
amounts of practical experience. Legends can from outer space and presenting a synthesis of
flourish in a culture in which there are few estab- post-theosophical and other esoteric doctrines. (2)
lished channels of transmission for historically These proto-New Age movements might have
accurate information. remained marginal, had it not been for the explo-
sion of the counterculture in the 1960s. The cultic
3. RoOTS: THE ESOTERIC milieu picked up the beliefs of the proto-New Age
BACKGROUND and eclectically combined them with a variety of
The emic historiography of the New Age will other elements, both of Western esoteric prove-
thus highlight a set of exotic cultures as sources. nance and of various Oriental origins. (3) The
Typically, Egypt, India, China, Tibet, the Native 1970s were characterized by a increasing self-
Americas, or even the fabled continents of Atlantis awareness within the cultic milieu of being a
and Lemuria are claimed to be the ultimate origins movement with shared goals. With a decade of per-
of one’s own methods and creeds. More scholarly spective, journalist Marilyn Ferguson (b. 1938) in
historiographies, on the other hand, tend to see the her apologetic and highly influential book The
New Age as an eclectic combination of several Aquarian Conspiracy (1980) summed up the New
strands of Western esotericism, with roots stretch- Age as a gentle conspiracy of awakened and trans-
ing back to the Renaissance (Hanegraaff 1996, formed individuals. (4) The 1980s saw the increas-
esp. Chapter 14). These Renaissance forms of eso- ing dominance of the New Age sensu lato over the
tericism were, however, radically transformed millennialist New Age sensu stricto. Whereas Fer-
under the impact of modernization. Much of the guson’s book summed up the hopes and aspirations
present New Age is prefigured by the ideas of indi- of the New Age sensu lato, the book of the 1980s
viduals crucial to this process of modernization, that indicated where the movement had actually
such as Franz Anton Mesmer and > Emanuel headed was Shirley MacLaine’s Out on a Limb
Swedenborg. (1987). Here, the author presents her spiritual
From the mid-rgth century on, there are several quest as a series of encounters with New Age ele-
main reference points from which the history of the ments such as trance channeling and the belief in
New Age can be traced. The first reference point reincarnation. (5) The 1990s and beyond have seen
would be theosophy [> Theosophical Society] and a gradual assimilation of at least parts of the New
its heirs. The second would be the harmonial reli- Age sensu lato into mainstream culture. Character-
gions that followed the American mesmerist healer istically counter-cultural elements of the first gen-
Phineas Parkhurst Quimby (1802-1866). The ear- erations of New Age have tacitly been dropped.
liest manifestations of what would emerge as the There has been a shift in the New Age constituency
New Age were an English phenomenon, and were from younger people to a larger age group. More-
largely influenced by the mystical and speculative over, whereas the first generation of New Age
elements found in the post-theosophical move- spokespersons used “New Age” as a self-designa-
ments active in the UK. Somewhat later, as these tion, the term has become increasingly understood
early currents gained a foothold in America, they as a pejorative, even meaningless epithet. At the
were integrated with the harmonial religions, lead- same time, New Age literature is increasingly sold
ing to an increasing emphasis on personal well- in mainstream book shops and reaches the best-
being, prosperity and the idea that we create the seller lists, and New Age beliefs and practices are
world we live in. A third, more recent reference prominently displayed in the popular media. The
point has been the psychologization of religion. For New Age as a definable movement may be on the
the purposes of tracing the emergence of the New wane, but the wider New Age discourse, i.e. a doc-
Age, > Jungism and the > Human Potential Move- trinally and historically related group of concepts
ment are of particular significance. and rituals, shows no sign of disappearing.
The syncretism of theosophy, the harmonial reli- To sum up these changes, techniques once seen as

--- Page 284 ---
NEW AGE MOVEMENT 860
linked by the common ideological core of a major texts and radically reinterpreted in order to fit
planetary shift (a New Age sensu stricto) became the specific preoccupations of the New Age. The
part of an encompassing worldview that empha- palette of practices that arises in this manner is used
sized personal rather than global transformation (a as a toolkit from which each individual New Ager
New Age sensu lato), to finally once again become can pick and combine elements ad lib. The ration-
increasingly compartmentalized into a variety of ale for encouraging such a mix is the characteristi-
practices and beliefs, of which some have success- cally modern individualistic assumption that our
fully entered mainstream culture. personal opinions are more important than the
suggestions of any authority. Since contemporary
4. New AGE RELIGION AND society offers few tradition-bound answers to the
MODERNITY question how we should understand ourselves and
Although New Age sources will point at a vari- our identities, many competing models of selfhood
ety of ancient and distant Others as the ultimate coexist. The New Age offers a self-reflexive dis-
sources of rituals and doctrines, there are good rea- course that enables individuals to understand the
sons to see New Age religiosity as a quintessentially shortcomings of their lives as the failure to realize
modern, Western phenomenon. The processes of their full potentials. Thus, it is the contention of
modernization can conveniently be summed up in self-help texts, manuals of divination as well as
two groups. On the one hand, older elements of channeled texts that there is a true self that needs to
Western esotericism have been influenced by be unearthed behind the dross of the false ego.
important shifts in intellectual culture, giving rise Most of these elements become available through
to a more general socio-historical phenomenon processes that reveal a large-scale adaptation to the
that can be etically referred to as occultism [> forces of the market economy. New Age elements
occult / occultism]. On the other hand, shifts in in the form of books, workshops, rituals, and so
the social structures of modernity have more forth are sold and bought in the same way as any
specifically influenced the New Age. other products. Furthermore, such rituals as
The shifts in intellectual culture can (largely fol- affirmations and visualizations can be performed
lowing Hanegraaff 1996, esp. chapter 15) be with the explicit goal of attaining affluence. Becom-
summed up in four points. Occultism remodeled ing wealthy is at least by some New Agers per-
elements of older esotericism in the image of the ceived as a spiritual goal.
natural sciences, not least by phrasing them in The modernity of the New Age is, however,
terms of mechanical links of cause and effect. The only partial. Thus, New Age understandings of
emergence of Orientalist discourse, especially personal experience are ina sense pre-critical. They
through the emergence of academic disciplines usually eschew any discussion of the constructed
such as history of religion and anthropology, par- nature of experience, and typically view spiritual
tially reoriented esoteric currents toward the East. experience as a faithful representation of under-
Evolutionism, one of the key symbols of roth and lying reality. Furthermore, in a characteristic para-
early 20th century discourse, entered esotericism dox of New Age religiosity, the notion of an
and led to the widespread assumption that we are entirely individual spiritual quest can imply partic-
all embarked on a journey of spiritual progress. ipating in rituals scripted by others and adopting
The syncretism with certain forms of psychology explanatory frameworks expounded by authorita-
led to increasingly blurred boundaries between the tive spokespersons.
concepts of psychological insight and spiritual
development. 5. WHITHER THE NEw AGE?
The adaptations of New Age to the structural As noted above, a number of concepts associated
characteristics of modernity can (loosely following only a couple of decades ago with the New Age,
the discussion in Heelas 1996) be summed up in such as the millennialist aspirations, have prac-
terms such as globalization, individualization, re- tically disappeared. Other beliefs, such as the
flexivity, commercialization and commodification. existence of Atlantis, may become increasingly
The Orientalism of occultist movements has largely marginalized due to the difficulties in reconciling
been superseded by an eclectic approach typical of such views with elementary scientific literacy. At
a globalized religious scene. Individual beliefs and the same time, other sectors of New Age thinking
practices can be picked from anywhere on the are becoming increasingly aligned with popular
globe, from the Native Americas to Egypt, from culture. Prominent New Age authors such as
China to Polynesia, lifted out of their original con- Deepak Chopra (b. 1947) and James Redfield (b.

--- Page 285 ---
861 NEW THOUGHT MOVEMENT
1950) sell millions of copies of their books and New Thought Movement
become celebrities far beyond the confines of an
underground cultic milieu. In some cases, esoteric Originally known under many names — such as
rituals seem even to attempt to move toward full- Mental Science, Divine Science, Spiritual Science,
scale incorporation into the societal and cultural Religious Science, Christian Science, Unity, Mind
mainstream. Cure, Science of Being, Home of Truth — the popu-
One example of this process comes from the field lar American self-help psychology known as New
of nursing. In the United States and Canada, Ther- Thought began to spread during the 1870s and had
apeutic Touch or TT, a method of ritual healing cre- secured a mass audience by the end of the century.
ated by theosophist Dora Kunz and her pupil The term “New Thought” itself was introduced
Dolores Krieger in the early 1970s, has been partly in the 1890s and was eventually adopted by its
accepted by mainstream institutions. Despite the main organizational body, the International New
legitimacy thereby accorded to the practice, Thera- Thought Alliance (INTA; see Braden 1987, 170-
peutic Touch builds on a view of the human body 229). In spite of such organizational efforts, New
that departs radically from any biomedical model, Thought has always been an ‘open, eclectic and
and which is conspicuously similar to that of e.g. easily splintered’ movement (Satter 1999, 6), and
mesmerism or Reiki healing, i.e. the assumption its basic tenets are by no means limited to groups
that there is a human energy field which extends and individuals affiliated with the INTA; rather, its
beyond the boundaries of the physical body. Yet basic theories, worldviews and practices can be
another example is found in the world of manage- encountered in many places, not least in the con-
ment. Courses in such techniques as fire-walking temporary ~» New Age movement.
and the enneagram (a technique of personality All varieties of New Thought are based upon a
assessment with spiritual overtones) are widely radical ideology of “mind over matter”, which
sold to major companies in Europe and America. claims that we create our own reality according to
Practices that were once part of the cultic milieu our beliefs. Any limitation in our personal reality is
have become tools in promoting social bonding the direct reflection of limiting beliefs; therefore if
among employees. Stripped of their controversial we change those beliefs, our reality changes. This
New Age label, several such practices and beliefs principle is applied most famously to health and
that have effectively sprung from the New Age illness, and implies that any illness is based upon
milieu are increasingly perceived as part of main- negative patterns of thought and can be cured by
stream culture. positive thinking. But New Thought increasingly
came to be applied to other domains of human life
Lit.: Christoph Bochinger, “New Age” und moderne as well, including money, work, relationships, and
Religion: Religionswissenschaftliche Analysen, Guter- spiritual attainment; some of its adherents — includ-
sloh: Kaiser, 1994 # Colin Campbell, “The Cult, The ing central figures such as Emma Curtis Hopkins —
Cultic Milieu and Secularization”, A Sociological Year-
have even claimed that death is a limiting belief, so
book of Religin in Britain 5 (1972), 119-136 ¢
that positive thinking can lead to physical immor-
Dominic Corrywright, Theoretical and Empirical
Investigations into New Age Spiritualities, Oxford: tality. The main technique for “reprogramming”
Peter Lang, 2003 ¢ Olav Hammer, Claiming Knowl- the mind is known as “affirmations”: short, posi-
edge: Strategies of Epistemology from Theosophy to tive statements that are ritually repeated until they
the New Age, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2000 ¢ Wouter J. take the place of their negative counterparts (for
Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture: example, “I am perfectly healthy” as a counterpart
Esotericism in the Mirror of Secular Thought. Leiden:
to the implicit belief that “I am sick”). Originally
E.J. Brill, 1996 ¢ Paul Heelas The New Age Move-
the use of affirmations was combined with the use ment: The Celebration of the Self and the Sacralization
of Modernity, Oxford: Blackwell, 1996 James R. of “denials” (for example, “I do not have cancer”),
Lewis and J. Gordon Melton (eds.), Perspectives on the but these have eventually grown less popular, pro-
New Age, Albany: State University of New York Press, bably because the very mention of the negative con-
1992 ¢ Steven J. Sutcliffe, Children of the New Age: A dition came to be seen as implying its reality. Since
History of Spiritual Practices, London, New York: New Thought claims to be using the invisible laws
Routledge, 2003 # Michael York, The emerging Net-
that govern the whole of reality, it has often pre-
work: A Sociology of the New Age and Neo-Pagan
sented itself as a “science”; but this science was Movements, Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield,
clearly a religious one because it was based upon
1995:
recognition of our “inner divinity” — the power of
OLAV HAMMER our mind is ultimately none other than the very

--- Page 286 ---
NEW THOUGHT MOVEMENT 862
power that creates the universe. Such a concept of netic fluid, but now claimed that a person’s beliefs
“religious science” is sometimes explained with and expectations were the key to manipulating it.
reference to a personal God, but may as well Mary Baker Eddy (1821-1910), the founder of
be explained in terms of an impersonal divine Christian Science, met Quimby in 1862 and was
“principle”. healed by him of her chronic “neuralgia in the spine
From the perspective of the history of “gnosis and stomach”. She then proceeded to spread the
and Western esotericism” New Thought might be new message; but whereas Quimby had explained
seen as a boundary case, but there are several rea- his healing method in terms of a religious world-
sons to nevertheless discuss it within that context. view influenced by ideas from ~ Swedenborg and
First, New Thought emerged as a reinterpretation + Andrew Jackson Davis, Eddy developed a new
of hypnotism, and is therefore part of the complex religious worldview of her own, in many ways
reception history of > Animal magnetism. Second, closer to traditional Christianity, called Christian
even if the foundational principles of New Thought Science and expounded in her Science and Health
may be seen as not specific to Western esoteric with Key to the Scriptures (1875). It claims that the
worldviews, many of its adherents and defenders universe as created by God or the “divine Mind” is
were in fact active within a broader and more entirely spiritual and good, whereas it is the human
complex “cultic milieu” — referred to as that of or “mortal mind” that creates the illusion of a
the American “metaphysical movements” (Judah material world and embodied persons. Illness
1967) or as “Harmonial Religion” (Ahlstrom results from the incorrect belief in the reality of
1972) -, the literature of which is permeated by ele- these illusions, but we can be saved by recognizing
ments from e.g. Emersonian Transcendentalism, our “divine within” and acknowledging an entirely
~ Swedenborgianism, ~ Spiritualism and modern spiritual reality. Eddy eventually came to sharply
Theosophy [~ Theosophical Society]. And third, oppose her Christian Science against the ideas and
New Thought has exerted an incalculable influ- practices of other New Thought leaders, but her
ence on the zoth-century development of popular religion is nonetheless a clear example of the basic
Western esotericism; as a major aspect of the New Thought perspective.
“psychologization of esotericism and sacralization Warren Felt Evans (1817-1889), author of the
of psychology” (Hanegraaff 1996/1998, 482-513) first mind cure study (The Mental Cure, 1869), was
it is essential to the contemporary pop-esotericism healed by Quimby of chronic nervous illness in
known as > New Age. 1863. Originally a Methodist minister, he joined
Although the New Hampshire clockmaker the Swedenborgian New Church in the same year.
Phineas Pankhurst Quimby (1802-1866) should While based upon Quimby’s ideas, Evans’ philoso-
not strictly be seen as the founder of New Thought phy of healing presents them in a context full of
(his manuscripts did not become available to the references to Swedenborg, German Idealism, and
public until 1921; Satter 1999, 59), he was cer- Hindu monism. Other than Eddy, who bitterly
tainly its originator. In 1838 he attended a stage opposed his teachings, Evans did not see matter as
performance by the French mesmerist Charles intrinsically evil or unreal. Matter is an inherently
Poyen, and decided to set up his own practice as a good reality that becomes evil only if it gains
magnetizer. During the 1840s he toured through dominion over spirit; it is a passive, plastic force
Maine and New Brunswick with an assistant, that reacts to emotions, which in turn are shaped
Lucius Burkmar, who diagnosed diseases while in a by thought. And against Eddy’s traditional empha-
hypnotic trance. But when Quimby discovered that sis on repentance and sin, Evans spoke much more
he could also heal his patients by direct psychic positively of an inner divine spark (called the
influence without a medium, and reflected on the “Ego”, the “I Am” or the “inner Self”) which made
absurd simplicity of some of Burkmar’s cures (e.g. each human being ‘a God, possessed of all the
herb tea against advanced cancer), he drew the ra- attributes of its parent source, among which are
dical conclusion that all such healing methods were omniscience and omnipresence’ (see discussion in
equally successful because of his patients’ belief in Satter 1999, 70-78).
magnetic or electric currents that influenced their New Thought originally flourished in New Eng-
vital fluids, and in the accuracy of the medium’s or land, particularly in Boston with its congenial
the magnetizer’s cures. From there he developed a Transcendentalist traditions. But in the decade
philosophy of healing based upon the radical claim 1885-1895 the focus shifted to the Western states.
that the beliefs and expectations of patients are The central figure with respect to the spread and
fully responsible for their medical condition. development of New Thought in that period was
Quimby kept believing in the existence of a mag- Emma Curtis Hopkins (1851-1925), a renegade

--- Page 287 ---
863 NEW THOUGHT MOVEMENT
student of Eddy’s and revered by New Thought with Myrtle and Charles Fillmore’s Unity School of
leaders as the “teacher of teachers”. In 1883 she Christianity, their “Society of Silent Help” later
met Eddy, who told her about Christian Science, renamed “Society of Silent Unity”, and their jour-
after which her student Mary FE. Berry cured her of nals (Modern Thought, Christian Science Thought,
her sickliness. Hopkins joined the Christian Sci- Thought, Unity). The Fillmores’ enterprises be-
ence movement and quickly rose to a position of came enormously successful and proved how New
prominence, until she was evicted by Eddy from Thought could be made profitable from a business
her Massachusetts Metaphysical College and was point of view. One could join their Society for free,
forced to resign from the Christian Science Associ- and thereby become part of a network of people
ation in 1885. The main reason was an editorial she who promised to devote some time to meditation at
had written, in which she claimed to have met God nine o’clock each evening. Members could send in
“face to face” —a prerogative that Eddy claimed for “prayer requests”, specifying their troubles; but in
herself only. Hopkins moved to Chicago, where she order to benefit from the positive energies collec-
founded the successful “Hopkins Metaphysical tive channeled by the Society’s network, they had
Association”, which within a few years had estab- to purchase Unity magazine, where they would
lished branches in cities all over the United States. find an affirmation written for them, identified by a
From 1887 on the association published a journal personal certificate number.
(Truth, quickly followed by a new one, Christian Apart from organizations and their published
Science) and began an “Emma Hopkins College of teachings, New Thought ideas were also spread by
Christian Science”, later renamed as “Christian popular novels. Helen Van-Anderson (1859-?), a
Science Theological Seminary”. Beryl Satter, in a major New Thought missionary on behalf of Hop-
chapter that is the best existing study of Hopkins, kins and minister in the Boston “Church of the
emphasizes the prominence of women on all levels Higher Life”, published many tracts and books,
of her organization, in contrast to Eddy, who including the novels The Right Knock (1889) and
appointed men in positions of power in her church The Journal of a Live Woman (1895). Ursula
hierarchy (Satter 1999, 83-84). In her teachings, Newell Gestefeld (1845-1921) created her own
Hopkins adopted an ambiguous middle ground New Thought system (“Science of Being”, later
between Eddy and Evans. She opposed Eddy’s renamed “The Church of ‘The New Thought’”),
teachings about sin and adopted Evans’ emphasis wrote numerous tracts about her beliefs, and two
on the “God-Self” within. Going beyond the novels: The Woman Who Dares (1892) and The
domain of illness and health, she claimed that any Leprosy of Miriam (1894). And Alice Bunker
negative condition, including poverty, could be Stockham (1833-1912), one of the first women in
‘denied out of existence’. Explicitly advocating the United States to practice medicine, and inter-
self-love as something positive, she no less clearly nationally famous for her progressive tracts on
encouraged the “blame-the-victim” attitude which medicine, sexuality and women’s health, wrote The
has always been implicit in New Thought: any ne- Koradine Letters (1893) about a fictional New
gative condition is the victim’s own fault. Even- Thought Utopia called the “Arcadian Institute of
tually, the inevitable conflict between Hopkins’ Development”.
promise of godlike omnipotence and the less ideal In 1897 appeared Ralph Waldo Trine’s In Tune
realities of students’ daily experience turned her with the Infinite, which was an immediate success
theological seminary into ‘a hotbed of bitter and became the first New Thought bestseller. The
infighting and barely repressed emotional chaos’ New Thought movement was now firmly estab-
(Satter 1999, 94), as a result of which Hopkins lished in popular American culture, and received
withdrew from her seminary in 1895, and moved recognition in the media as a significant new spiri-
to New York City. For the last thirty years of her tual and healing current. Around the turn of the
life she continued receiving students, but remained century, the already mentioned trend of applying
aloof from the New Thought movement. New Thought principles to the acquisition of
That movement had now gained sufficient wealth became increasingly prominent, leading to
momentum to continue, under the guidance of new the perception among later scholars and critics of
leaders, most of them female. Malinda E. Cramer New Thought as primarily a “religion of success”.
(t 1907) founded the movement called Divine Sci- A major representatives of this trend was Helen
ence, continued after her death by Nona Brooks Wilmans (1831-1907), another student of Hop-
(1861-1945). Annie Rix Militz (1856-1924) kins, creator of yet another New Thought system
founded the Homes of Truth movement. Both called “Mental Science”, and author of The Con-
movements collaborated with one another and quest of Poverty (1899). After many years of

--- Page 288 ---
NEW THOUGHT MOVEMENT 864
struggle with poverty and hardship, she finally basic ideology they were dependent on the authors
found prosperity when she began to sell her lessons mentioned earlier, to which they did not add much
in Mental Science. She subsequently founded news. After what seems to have been a decline of
journals (Wilmans Express, Freedom), teaching popularity during the years of World War II,
institutes (“Wilmans Metaphysical College”, New Thought made a strong comeback in 1952
“University of Psychical Research”) and a “Mental with Norman Vincent Peale’s bestseller The
Science Association”, and made great sums of Power ofPositive Thinking. Peale, a minister in the
money with her mail-order business of Mental Sci- Dutch Reformed Church, sold his message so suc-
ence lessons. Wilmans was a major advocate of the cessfully — also by means of lecture tours, articles
New Thought quest for physical immortality, and in magazines, and appearances on radio and tele-
developed New Thought into an uncompromising vision — that in 1954 he was elected one of the
social-Darwinist ideology of ruthless competition “Twelve Best U.S. Salesmen” (Meyer 1988, 260).
for wealth and success: the suffering are only In his wake, the book market was once again
getting what they deserve, and poverty is a sign of flooded by popular self-help books in the New
inferiority. Thought tradition, and this production has not
During the early decades of the 20th century the remained limited to the United States but has
theological language and high-minded idealism of spread to Western Europe as well. Louise L. Hay’s
the early New Thought movement was gradually bestseller You can Heal your Life (1984) is perhaps
replaced by a more pragmatic emphasis on the one of the most famous titles demonstrating the
power of thought through meditation and affiirma- prominence of New Thought within the New Age
tions, increasingly expressed in psychological ter- movement, but the core ideology of New Thought
minology. From the 1870s through the 1890s a is also basic to the message of many more overtly
dominant “anti-desire” school of New Thought religious titles such as, notably, the channeled text
had emphasized the need to deny material urges, A Course in Miracles (1975), believed to have been
selfhood and desire, whereas a “pro-desire” mino- dictated by Jesus. Furthermore, strong influences
rity had presented mind and matter as interactive, from the New Thought tradition can be found in
had emphasized the value of selfhood and had pre- many New Age authors whose message as a whole
sented desire as good and even divine (Satter 1999, cannot be reduced to New Thought; one represen-
14 and passim). After 1900 the emphasis began to tative example is > Jane Roberts’ influential series
shift towards the latter perspective, so that New of books channeled by the discarnate entity Seth,
Thought increasingly became a brand of pop-psy- who claims that “we create our own reality” but
chology catering to consumers’ need for “success” does so in the context of a complex metaphysics
in all fields of life: health, wealth, and happiness in that goes far beyond anything found in standard
general. As such the movement remained success- New Thought literature. Finally, the influence of
ful, with hundreds of New Thought centers all over New Thought is by no means limited to the New
the United States, six major journals, a high pro- Age context. It is also strongly present in the ser-
file in mainstream periodicals, and a remarkable mons of popular preachers closer to the Christian
number of self-help bestsellers. As early as 1902, mainstream, such as Robert Schuller or many min-
William James deplored the growing phenomenon isters in the pentecostal tradition.
of New Thought literature taking the form of
‘insincere stuff, mechanically produced for the Lit.: Sydney Ahlstrom, A Religious History of the
market’, and filled with ‘verbiage... some of American People, New Haven & London: Yale Uni-
which is so moonstruck with optimism and so versity Press, 1972 @ Charles S. Braden, Spirits in
Rebellion: The Rise and Development of New Thought
vaguely expressed that an academically trained
(1963), Dallas: Soutern Methodist University Press,
intellect finds it almost impossible to read it at all’ 1987 @ Robert C. Fuller, Mesmerism and the American
(Varieties of Religious Experience, lect. 1V-V). This Cure ofSouls, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
observation would continue to hold true for much Press, 1982 ¢ Gail Harley, “New Thought and the
New Thought literature throughout the rest of the Harmonial Family”, in: Timothy Miller (ed.), Amer-
century. ica’s Alternative Religions, Albany: State University of
While many older New Thought churches have New York Press, 1995, 325-337 @ Carl T. Jackson,
“The New Thought Movement and the Nineteenth-
continued to flourish throughout the zoth century,
Century Discovery of Oriental Religions”, Journal of
new schools kept being founded during its first Popular Culture 9 (1975), 523-548 ¢ J. Stillson Judah,
decades, such as notably Ernest Holmes’ “Reli- The History and Philosophy of the Metaphysical
gious Science” (founded in 1927); but as to their Movements in America, Philadelphia: Westminster

--- Page 289 ---
865 NEWTON
Press, 1967 @ J. Gordon Melton, “New Thought and 1677), Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Trin-
the New Age”, in: James R. Lewis & J. Gordon Melton ity, who soon became his mentor. Over the years,
(eds.), Perspectives on the New Age, Albany: State Uni-
his protectors regularly provided him (covertly)
versity of New York Press, 1992, 15-29 ¢ Donald
with alchemical manuscripts which he painstak-
Meyer, The Positive Thinkers: Popular Religious
Psychology from Mary Baker Eddy to Norman Vin- ingly copied in his own handwriting before retur-
cent Peale and Ronald Reagan (1965), Middletown: ning them, thereby establishing for himself an
Wesleyan University Press, 1988 Beryl Satter, Each extensive library of contemporary alchemical trea-
Mind a Kingdom: American Women, Sexual Purity, tises (it included notably Ashmole’s six-volume
and the New Thought Movement, 1875-1920, Berke- Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum as well as
ley, Los Angeles, London: University of California
works by > Maier, > Llull, Sendivogius, and Phi-
Press, 1999.
lalethes [-* Thomas Vaughan]).
Newton’s religious beliefs soon put him to the
WOUTER J. HANEGRAAFF
test. To graduate from Trinity (1665), he had to
attest to an acceptance of the Thirty-Nine Articles
Newton, Isaac,* 24.12.1642 of the Anglican Church, which ran counter to his
Woolsthorpe, ¢ 20.3.1727 Kensington Puritanical concept of a religion without an official
clergy, as well as his fanatical Arian rejection of the
Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the Uni- Trinitarian dogma. The problem became acute in
versity of Cambridge. Fellow (1672) and later Pre- 1669 when he inherited the Lucasian chair from
sident (1703) of the Royal Society of London. Isaac Barrow, who had become King Charles II’s
Member of the Convention Parliament (1689). Chaplain. Fortunately for him, six years later
Warden (1696), then Master (1699) of the Royal (probably on advice from Barrow, who had been
Mint. Knighted by Queen Anne (1705). Since appointed Master of Trinity College in the mean-
Newton’s seminal achievements in science and time), Charles II granted him exemption from the
mathematics are extremely well known, they will obligation — normally required of the holder of the
not be discussed in the present short entry, which Lucasian chair — to take holy orders.
concentrates exclusively on those aspects of his At Trinity, Newton attended few classes, if any.
intellectual development that are relevant to the He spent much of his time on his own, reading,
subject of the present Dictionary. developing his seminal scientific and mathematical
Newton was born at the family estate in Wools- ideas, as well as practicing alchemy and studying
thorpe three months after his father had died. His religion, two disciplines he believed to be con-
mother remarried when he was three. Widowed a nected. Indeed, he considered the goal of alchemy
second time, she placed him as a boarder to attend to be ‘to glorify God in his wonderful works, & to
school in nearby Grantham when he was twelve. teach a man how to live well’, and asserted: ‘This
During his six-year stay at his lodger’s, an apothe- philosophy both speculative & active is not only
cary, Newton acquired and/or developed some of to be found in the volume of nature but also in
the interests which were to profoundly affect the the sacred scriptures...’ (Keynes MS 33:5v). In
course of his life: an hypochondriac fascination for 1673, to carry out this double quest, he established
the concoction of remedies to cure human illnesses; a full-fledged alchemical laboratory in the small
a tantalizing curiosity for > alchemy (acquired wooden shed which stood in a garden attached to
from old books he read in his lodger’s attics); and, the rooms he occupied at E-4 Great Court, close to
through the teachings of a local divine, a visceral Trinity’s Great Gate. He equipped it over the years
engrossment with the Puritanical concept of a dual with elaborate apparatus and furnaces which he
world consisting of God’s Works (Nature) and used to perform numerous experiments, generally
God’s Words (the Holy Scriptures). aimed at testing recipes copied from alchemical
Newton’s latent interest in alchemy took a deci- manuscripts. He had a chance to test his ability to
sive turn soon after his enrolment in 1661 at Tri- prepare ‘true medicines’ when his mother fell ill in
nity College, at the University of Cambridge, when 1679. His failure to save her left him deeply
he made contact with erudite divines who, among affected. His efforts culminated in 1684 when he
other things, aimed at promoting and “rationalis- thought for some time that he had succeeded in
ing” alchemy in England. Foremost among them “opening” metals to extract from them the long
were the leading Cambridge Platonist > Henry sought-for “Philosophical Mercury”.
More, the Oxford “Great Experimentalist” Robert Even as he attempted to read into God’s Book
Boyle (1626-1691), and Isaac Barrow (1630- of Nature, Newton dutifully studied the Holy

--- Page 290 ---
NEWTON 866
Scriptures, believing that the unravelling of the More, who detested “Enthusiasts”). He somewhat
‘true past’ (as revealed through a proper under- recanted this cautious approach when he set out to
standing of Biblical prophecies) was his ‘duty of the write his second major treatise, Opticks (1704),
first moment’ (Yahuda MS 21:2). He spent a con- after he had left Cambridge to serve at the Mint in
siderable amount of time trying to establish a gen- London — and after his arch-rival at the Royal Soci-
uine plan of the Temple King Solomon had built in ety, Robert Hooke (1635-1703), who might have
Jerusalem under the Lord’s guidance: this he saw as contested it, had died. The Queries he appended to
an Earthly representation of the universe and a pa- the end of Book 3 of his treatise divulge some of his
radigm for the future of the World. alchemical findings. But when his intimate friend
In Observations upon the Prophecies of Daniel Nicolas Fatio de Duillier and his favourite “disci-
(published posthumously in 1733), he expresses ple” and successor at the Lucasian chair, William
the opinion (based on his own elaborate calcula- Whiston, fell into disgrace after revealing their Ari-
tions) that the Day of Judgement would come in anism (in 1707 for the former, in 1710 for the lat-
1948, forty-nine years after the Jews returned to ter), Newton cautiously refrained from coming to
Jerusalem, a date he was to revise later on several their rescue. When a destitute Whiston applied for
occasions. The conviction that in all cases the Great membership in the Royal Society (1716), Newton
Event would not occur during his lifetime may have threatened to resign from the Society if the nomi-
contributed to his decision not to divulge the nation was accepted.
results of his findings. A lone and complex figure, Newton never
Newton’s interest in the Solar system with its travelled outside a small triangle delimited by
planets orbiting around a “central fire”, the Sun, Cambridge, London and his native village of Wool-
relates in part to his belief that the ancient Cult of sthorpe. Universally known and admired for his
Vesta, which consisted in keeping ‘a fire for offering outstanding contributions to scientific knowledge,
sacrifices that burned perpetually in the middle of it is nevertheless estimated that over two-thirds
a sacred place’ (Yahuda MS 17.3:8-10), had been of his writings concern problems arising from
the true religion ‘until the nations corrupted it’ alchemy and religion. To that extent at least, New-
(Yahuda MS 41:7). Urged by his admirer, the ton’s name properly belongs in a dictionary
astronomer Edmund Halley, to expound in writing devoted to the study of the history of Western
his System of the World, Newton invoked More’s Esotericism.
Gnostic “hylarchic principle” which the Platonist
had forged to explain natural and supernatural Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, Lon-
don, 1687 Opticks or A Treatise of the Reflec-
phenomena through the intervention of spirits —
tions, Refractions, Inflections & Colours of Light,
which Newton called Powers, Virtues or Forces — London, 1704 ¢ The Chronology of Ancient King-
carrying out the will of God. Disguised under the doms Amended, London, 1728 ¢ Observations upon
innocuous-sounding designations of vis insita and the Prophecies of Holy Writ, London, 1733 # An
vis centripeta, he placed these “active principles”, Historical Account of Two Notable Corruptions
rooted in hermetic tradition, at the very foundation of Scripture, London, 1754 ¢ Four Letters to Dr.
of his celebrated Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Bentley, London, 1756 # Theological Manuscripts
(H. McLachlan, ed.), Liverpool: Liverpool University
Mathematica (1687).
Press, 1950 # Newton’s alchemical manuscripts are
Newton shared Henry More’s belief that ancient gathered, for the most part, in the Keynes Collection at
philosophers — one of them having been > Moses — King’s College, Cambridge. Some of his theological
had been the depositors of true knowledge manuscripts (i.e. the Yahuda Collection) are kept in the
(philosophia perennis). Consequently, while writ- Jewish National and University Library in Jerusalem.
ing his great treatise, he rejected the use of mod-
Lit.: J.-P. Auffray, Newton ou le triomphe de l’alchimie,ern techniques of algebra, developed notably by
Paris: Le Pommier, 2000 ¢ David Brewster, Memoirs of
Descartes, and chose to formulate the numerous
the Life, Writings and Discoveries ofSir Isaac Newton,
Problems, Propositions, Theorems and Lemna Edinburgh, 1855 ¢ B.J.T. Dobbs, The Foundations of
found in his treatise by resorting exclusively to the Newton’s Alchemy, or The Hunting of the Greene
use of the “Theory of proportions” expounded in Lyon, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975 ¢
Book V of Euclid’s Elements (which had been eadem, The Janus Faces of Genius: The Role of
translated from Greek to Latin by Isaac Barrow). Alchemy in Newton’s Thought, Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1991 ¢ I. Macphail, Alchemy
Newton successfully kept his alchemical and the-
and the Occult: Catalogue of Books from the Collec-
ological interests secret during his lifetime, fear- tion of Paul and Mary Mellon Given to Yale University
ing possible damaging consequences to himself if Library, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1968 ¢
they would become known (on this, he followed C. Webster, From Paracelsus to Newton: Magic and the

--- Page 291 ---
867 NICOLAITANS
Making of Modern Science, Cambridge: Cambridge heretics known to him (Adversus Haereses I, 26, 3).
University Press, 1982 # R.S. Westfall, Never at Rest: The Nicolaitans are said to be followers of that
A Biography of Isaac Newton, Cambridge: Cambridge
Nicolaus who was one of the seven ordained in
University Press, 1980 ¢ idem, “Newton and
Jerusalem by the apostles (Acts 6:5). They lead lives
Alchemy”, in: Brian Vickers (ed.), Occult and Scientific
Mentalities in the Renaissance, Cambridge etc.: Cam- of unrestrained indulgence, and are rightly con-
bridge University Press, 1984, 315-335 # M. White, demned in the Apocalypse of John. In another con-
Isaac Newton: The Last Sorcerer, London: Fourth text (Adv. Haer. Ill, 11, 1) Irenaeus refers to the
Estate, 1997 ¢ Garry W. Trompf, “On Newtonian His- Nicolaitans as ‘an offset of that “knowledge” falsely
tory”, in: Stephen Gaukroger (ed.), The Uses ofAntiq- so called’ whose adherents claim that the Father of
uity, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1991, 213-249 ¢ Loup Verlet,
the Lord is not the Creator. The Creator’s son is not
La malle de Newton, Paris: Gallimard, 1993 # David
the Christ from above; Christ, impassible, Castillejo, The Expanding Force in Newton’s Cosmos,
Madrid, 1981. descended upon Jesus and then ascended, presum-
ably meaning that Christ did not suffer crucifixion.
JEAN-PAUL AUFFRAY For Irenaeus the Nicolaitans are clearly heretics
of a Gnostic sort, although he does not expressly
claim that Nicolaus himself was a Gnostic. That
Nicolaitans claim is made by Hippolytus. Relying on Irenaeus’
account, Hippolytus points out that there are
A group of deviant Christians denounced in the among the Gnostics diversities of opinion. Nico-
Book of Revelation in the “letters” to seven laus is singled out as being ‘a cause of the wide-
churches of Asia Minor written by John the Seer in spread combination of these wicked men’. After his
the name of Jesus Christ (Rev. 2-3). The church at appointment by the Apostles, he ‘departed from
Ephesus is praised for hating the ‘works of the correct doctrine’, and promoted licentiousness. His
Nicolaitans’ (2:6). The church at Pergamum is followers were condemned by John in his Apoca-
reproved for tolerating the Nicolaitans in its midst, lypse (Refutatio VII, 36).
who promote eating food sacrificed to idols The author of Pseudo-Tertullian’s treatise, Ad-
(eidolothuta) and fornication (2, 14-15). The versus omnes haereses, a 3rd-century document
church at Thyatira is reproved for tolerating a possibly based on a lost work of Hippolytus, pro-
prophetess called Jezebel, who is said to promote vides additional information: Nicolaus, one of the
fornication and eating food sacrificed to idols seven deacons appointed by the Apostles, taught
(2:20). Probably a Nicolaitan leader, her teaching is that Darkness lusted after Light, and there arose as
also said to include knowledge of the ‘deep things a result various combinations of aeons and other
of Satan’ (2:24). foul beings. His heresy was condemned by John in
Various assessments of this information are pos- his Apocalypse (Haer. 1). While Ps.-Tertullian’s
sible. The eating of meat sacrificed to pagan deities account is brief and somewhat confused, some sort
is condemned in the “Apostolic Decree” (Acts of Gnostic heresy is envisaged.
15:20, 29), but regarded as a matter of indifference Tertullian mentions the Nicolaitans three times.
by Paul (1 Cor. 8), who nevertheless condemns par- In his treatise Adversus Marcionem he refers to
ticipation in pagan meals and idolatry in general the Nicolaitans’ ‘maintenance of lust and luxury’
(x Cor. 10). The “fornication” referred to in Reve- (I, 29). In his De praescriptione haereticorum he
lation may be taken metaphorically as idolatry, e.g. refers to a contemporary group of Nicolaitans
willing participation in the emperor cult and other called ‘the Caian heresy’ who teach a docetic Chris-
civic religious activities, universally condemned in tology, i.e., who deny that Christ ‘has come in the
early catholic Christianity. On the other hand, it flesh’ (x John 4:2-3; Praesc. 33; “Caian” may refer
may refer to sexual license, expressly forbidden in to a sect leader called Gaius; or, perhaps, it is a
the “Apostolic Decree”, and also by Paul (1 Cor. corruption of “Cainite”). In a discussion of some
5-6). The claim to knowledge of the ‘deep things passages in the Revelation ofJohn dealing with for-
(bathé) of Satan’ may be taken as a claim to pro- nication, he refers to the prophetess Jezebel (Rev. 2,
tection against the consequences of “Satanic” acts 20) as having taught ‘what she had learnt from the
performed by the sectarians. On the other hand, Nicolaitans’ (De pudicitia 19).
John may have intentionally misrepresented a sec- - Clement of Alexandria has a different assess-
tarian claim to knowledge of the ‘deep things of ment of the traditions relating to the Nicolaitans.
God’ (cf. 1 Cor. 2, 10). He comments on a saying of Nicolaus, ‘one must
Nicolaitans are referred to again almost a century abuse the flesh’, which is quoted by those who
later by Irenaeus, in the context of a discussion of claim to be followers of this pervert. What Nico-

--- Page 292 ---
NICOLAITANS 868
laus advocated was asceticism, but his supposed quoted by Clement is: ‘Unless one copulates every
followers misinterpret his saying, and abandon day, one cannot have eternal life’ (Pan. 25, 1, 6). He
themselves to a goat-like licentiousness (Stromateis then brings into his account doctrines associated
II, 118). Clement here attempts to separate the with ‘Gnostics and Phibionites, the so-called disci-
Nicolaitan beliefs and practices from the “apos- ples of Epiphanes, the Stratiotics, Levitics, Bor-
tolic” Nicolaus. Nevertheless, he does concede a borites and the rest’ (25, 2, 1), a highly involved
connection between him and the Nicolaitans, even mythology featuring Barbelo, Ialdabaoth, Pruni-
if they are accused of misinterpreting his teachings. cus, etc., all of which is also attributed to Nicolaus.
Later, Clement expands on these points. He repeats The following lengthy chapter (“Against Gnostics,
Nicolaus’ saying in the context of a story that his or Borborites”, Pan. 26) goes into great detail in
supposed followers tell about Nicolaus and his expostulating on the foul deeds ritually committed
beautiful wife. After the ascension of Christ, Nico- by these heretics, ‘who sprout from Nicolaus like
laus was accused before the apostles of jealousy; so fruit from a dunghill’ (26, 1, 1). Unfortunately,
he offered her to anyone who desired to marry her. Epiphanius’ account is so confused and so filled
‘Those who share his heresy’ (i.e. members of the with invective that virtually nothing of historical
Nicolaitan sect) interpret Nicolaus’s saying and the value can be learned from it, either about Nicolaus
story about his wife as a justification for their enor- or about the sect named after him.
mities (Strom. III, 25). But, in fact, Nicolaus never What can be concluded from these accounts? We
had any relations with any woman besides his wife, know from the Book of Revelation that, in the late
and his progeny remained virgins to their old age. rst century, there was a group of Christians called
When he brought his wife before the apostles, on Nicolaitans, whose views regarding pagan associa-
whose account he was jealous, he did so as an tions were rather liberal. They may have traced
act of ‘suppression of passion’. ‘He taught what their beliefs and practices back to Nicolaus, the
it meant to “abuse the flesh” by restraining the ‘proselyte of Antioch’ (Acts 6, 5). They may also
distracting passions’ (Strom. III, 26). Clement is have claimed a special knowledge of spiritual
clearly attempting a “whitewash” of traditions relat- “deep things”, but whether they were at that time
ing to the “apostolic” Nicolaus. While he concedes “Gnostics” in the full sense of the term cannot be
the veracity of the story told about Nicolaus, and the established with any certainty. By the time of Ire-
authenticity of the saying attributed to him, he des- naeus (ca. 185), however, the Nicolaitans’ associa-
perately tries to defend Nicolaus by twisting the tion with Gnostic heresy has become an established
import of the story of him and his beautiful wife. As part of the tradition. Although Nicolaus and the
for the saying, the Greek verb used (parachresasthai) Nicolaitans persist in the heresiological catalogs
clearly means “abuse”, not “restrain” or “control”. into the sth century (Theodoret, Haereticarm fabu-
Clement’s version is followed by Eusebius in his larum compendium Ill, 1), it is not clear how long
Historia Ecclesiastica, Il, 29. He states that in the sect itself lasted. Eusebius, at least, regards the
apostolic times there existed for a short time the Nicolaitans as part of a history long past.
heresy of the Nicolaitans mentioned by the Apoca-
lypse of John. These people claimed to be follows A. Rousseau & L. Doutreleau (eds.), Irénée de Lyon:
of Nicolaus the deacon. There follows a direct quo- Contre les Hérésies, Livre I, vol. 2 (SC 264), Les
Editions du Cerf, 1979 (with French translation) ¢
tation of the passage from book III of Clement’s
O. Stahlin (ed.), Clemens Alexandrinus, Il, 4th ed.
Stromateis already referred to. He concludes this by L. Friichtel & U. Treu, Berlin: Akademie Verlag,
paragraph with a remark that the attempts to sub- 1985 ¢ M. Marcovich (ed.), Hippolytus: Refutatio
vert the truth in apostolic times were quickly extin- omnium haeresium (Patristische Texte und Studien,
guished. Eusebius apparently does not know of any 25), Berlin/New York: De Gruyter, 1986 ¢ A. Kroy-
survivors of the Nicolaitan sect in his own time mann (ed.), [Ps. Tertullian] Adversus omnes haereses
(CC, ser. Lat. II, originally edited in CSEL 47), Turn-(early 4th century).
hout, 1954 ¢ K. Lake (ed.), Eusebius: The Ecclesiastical
Later in the 4th century, however, Epiphanius
History, vol. 1, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
presents a very extensive account of Nicolaitans University Press, 1926 (with English translation) ¢
and heretics allegedly related to them, expanding K. Holl (ed.), Epiphanius I: Ancoratus. Panarion haer.
on the accounts of Irenaeus, Hippolytus, and 1-33, Leipzig: Hinrichs, 1915 ¢ English translations:
Clement of Alexandria. In his Panarion against A. Roberts and J. Donaldson (eds.), The Ante-Nicene
Heresies he first devotes a separate chapter to the Fathers: Translations of the Fathers down to A.D. 325,
vols. 1 (Irenaeus), 2 (Clement), 3 (Tertullian and Ps.- Ter-
Nicolaitans, beginning with Nicolaus the deacon
tullian), 4 (Tertullian, cont.), 5 (Hippolytus), repr. Wm
(Pan. 25). Although Epiphanius relies on Clement, B. Eerdmans: Michigan: Grand Rapids, 1963 ¢ J.E.L.
he does not share Clement’s interpretation of the Oulton and H. Chadwick, Alexandrian Christianity:
traditions. Epiphanius’ version of the saying Selected Translations of Clement and Origen with Intro-

--- Page 293 ---
869 NOVALIS
ductions and Notes, London: S.C.M. Press, 1954, 52 ¢ Saxon saltworks. The next year saw the publica-
F Williams, The Panarion of Epiphanius of Salamis, tion of his poems Hymnen an die Nacht (Hymns to
Book I (Sects 1-46), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1987, 77-99. the Night), but von Hardenberg’s health condition
declined, and his situation was worsened by the
Lit.: N. Brox, “Nikolaus und Nikolaiten”, Vigiliae
Christianae 19 (1965), 23-30 # K.A. Fox, “The Nico- suicide of his brother Bernhard on october 28.
laitans, Nicolaus and the early Church”, Studies in While still dreaming of new literary projects, he
Religion | Sciences Religieuses 23 (1994), 485-496 ¢ died less than half a year later.
E. Schiissler Fiorenza, “Apocalyptic and Gnosis in the The mining business ran in the family, and von
Book of Revelation”, Journal of Biblical Literature 92 Hardenberg may have had access to chemical and
(1973), 565-581 # D. Watson, “Nicolaitans”, in: alchemical texts while still living at home (see HKA
Anchor Bible Dictionary, vol. 4, New York: Double-
IV, 32). Among the hermetic, alchemical and theo- day, 1992, 1106-1107.
sophical authors and texts with which he is known
to have been familiar are Libavius, Thurneisser,
BIRGER A. PEARSON
G.W. Wedelius, the Rosicrucian Chymische Hoch-
zeit Christiani Rosenkreuz | Rosicrucianism I], >
Novalis (ps. of Georg Philipp Friedrich Robert Fludd, > Joan Baptista van Helmont, >
von Hardenberg),* 2.5.1772 Jacob Boehme, > J.E von Meyer, > Karl von
Oberwiederstedt, ¢ 25.3.1801 Eckartshausen, > Franz von Baader, and > Johann
Weissenfels Wilhelm Ritter. Quite some information about eso-
teric traditions he derived at second hand: thus he
A jurist, philosopher, mining engineer and learned about > Paracelsus, > Paracelsianism, and
famous Romantic poet, von Hardenberg was the doctrine of signatures notably from Kurt
raised in a large family. His father, having gone Sprengel’s Versuch einer pragmatischen Geschichte
through a religious crisis following the death of his der Arzneikunde (1792-1799), and Dietrich Tiede-
first wife in 1769, raised his children in the spirit mann’s Geist der spekulativen Philosophie (1791-
of Herrnhut > Pietism. From 1790 to 1794 von 1797) introduced him to such authors as Plotinus,
Hardenberg studied law, philosophy, history and > Llull, > Bruno and > Pordage (in addition to
mathematics at the Universities of Jena, where he several authors already mentioned above).
got into contact with Schiller; Leipzig, where he Novalis’ work can be considered under four
met his lifelong friend Friedrich Schlegel; and Wit- broad categories: his aphorisms or fragments, his
tenberg. Two other important meetings were with poetry, his novels, and his essays. In works belong-
the philosopher Fichte and the poet Hodlderlin, ing to the first category the esoteric dimension of
both in 1795. The year before, on 17 november his thinking is most explicit. In his Das Allgemeine
1794, Hardenberg had met the 12-year old Sophie Brouillon (The General Draft, 1798-1799) he
von Kiihn, in whom he saw the love of his life; the speculates about a universal encyclopedia of all
two got engaged one year later, but Sophie fell ill knowledge, joining together the scientific, literary,
and died on March 19, 1797, followed one month philosophical, and artistic domains into an organic
later by Friedrich’s beloved brother Erasmus. intellectual unity. It was to be based upon a semi-
Sophie’s death is generally seen as a decisive event otic Wechselrepresentationslehre, i.e. a universal
in Novalis’s development: her idealized image system of > correspondences predicated on the
henceforth becomes a major inspiration in his intimate “sympathy” between signifier and sig-
poetic work. Still in 1797 he made the acquain- nified. Novalis also referred to it as “magic” and as
tance of ~ Schelling in Leipzig; and from the end of “grammatical mysticism”: ‘Man does not speak
the year on he studied at the mining academy of alone — the Universe speaks too — everything speaks
Freiberg. Poems and fragments under the name — infinite languages/doctrine of signatures’ (HKA
Novalis now began to be published, and in 1798 he Ill, 267f.). Novalis’ “magical idealism” was the
began work on his Die Lehrlinge zu Sais (The Dis- product of these hermetic influences combined
ciples at Sais). In the summer of the same year he with Fichte’s transcendental philosophy. Such a
was diagnosed with tuberculosis, but nevertheless combination made it possible to interpret the con-
he got engaged with Julie von Charpentier in cept of macro/microcosm in a radical manner
December. In 1799 he worked on his Geistliche (Novalis at one point described his Beloved as the
Lieder (Spiritual Songs, a series of poems), abbreviation of the Universe and the Universe as
Die Christenheit oder Europa (Christendom or the elongation of his Beloved): ‘it makes no differ-
Europe, an essay), and his novel Heinrich von ence whether I place the World-All in myself,
Ofterdingen. Having completed his studies, in or myself in the World-All’ (HKA II, 382).
1799 he was appointed mining engineer at the Novalis defended an “esoteric” notion of universal

--- Page 294 ---
NOVALIS 870
religion, which would not be a matter of grimly dreams rather than of the events of ordinary life.
repeated outward observance but of inner “sci- Heinrich eventually meets a mysterious gnomic her-
entific” observation and transformation. The high- mit, and falls in love with a young and beautiful
est aim of spiritual education is to master one’s woman, Matilda. Heinrich discovers that ‘the
transcendental self, which is ‘the highest principle higher world is nearer to us than we usually
of all learning and art’. believe’ and that, indeed, ‘we already live in it’.
When we turn to Novalis’s poetry, we find a si- This may be called the essential poetic observation
milar unifying tendency, and the same quest for at the heart of Novalis’s prose fiction, where
self-knowledge or gnosis, notably in his elegy dreams, poetry, symbols, and stories within stories
Kenne dich selbst (Know Thyself): happy is he who all embody it. Among the embedded stories is
has found the (philosopher’s) ‘Stone of Eternal Novalis’ famous Mdrchen (chapter IX of the
Wisdom’ in himself, for he is the ‘true adept’ who novel), replete with terms and notions borrowed
needs no elixirs to turn everything into ‘life and from the literature of > alchemy, > animal magnet-
gold’ because he understands the meaning of the ism, and not least theosophy. Also theosophically
delphic maxim “know thyself”. Many of Novalis’s tinged is “Astralis”, a poetic jewel which opens
poems allude to a sense of the fragility of life and the second part of the book. The entity Astralis is of
the nearness of death. In “Der sterbende Genius” an androgynic nature; he/she is an intermediary
(The dying genius), Novalis writes of returning being who personifies the astral world, situated
again to his ancient home, of the ‘gates of the pri- between the material and the spiritual worlds.
mal world’ opening for him, just as in “Der Astralis is also the very symbol of poetry as Novalis
Fremdling” (The Stranger) he imagines ‘the great understands it.
day of birth’ in the beyond. The character of “the Finally we must turn to Novalis’s famous essay
Stranger” appears again in Novalis’s most famous “Die Christenheit oder Europa” (Christendom or
and influential Hymnen an die Nacht, the longest Europe), often cited as evidence of a conservative
poetic work that he wrote. In this beautiful and or reactionary political perspective. Novalis waxes
mysterious work he begins by celebrating the glit- nostalgic about the ‘beautiful, splendid’ times
tering stones, the tranquil plants and the delightful when Europe as a whole was still a Catholic Chris-
Light of life. But then he turns to the Night, telling tian land. Europe ‘fell asleep’ under the dead hand
the story of how the Gods were vanquished from of business and outward-directed activity during
human life, so that nature was rendered ‘lonely and the age of Protestantism, although Novalis men-
lifeless’, ‘bound by harsh numbers / and iron laws’ tions Zinzendorf, Jacob Boehme, and unspeci-
(‘Mit eiserner Kette band sie die diirre Zahl und das fied “secret societies” as representing very
strenge Mafs). The Gods were driven into the important ‘sparks of life’ within this general
Night, where they wait until ‘the dawn of the new process of decline. Furthermore, the “philantro-
age’. Novalis’s two novels — The Disciples at Sais pists and encyclopaedists” are invited to join the
and Heinrich von Ofterdingen — represent the more ‘friedenstiftende Loge’ (the peace-making lodge),
overt expression of his philosophical-religious eso- receive the brethren’s kiss, peel off ‘das graue Netz’
tericism in a hybrid form of aphoristic fiction. Of (the grey net) and behold the miracle of Nature,
these two works, the more unconventional is The History and Man. Perhaps the closest to Novalis’s
Disciples at Sais, a poetic-prose experiment rather vision of a unified and renewed, mystical Chris-
than a novel in any usual sense. Clearly reflecting tianity is that of > William Blake.
the doctrine of signatures, it begins by referring to While the (al)chemical dimensions of Novalis’
the ‘great manuscript of design’ that we see written thought have recently began to receive attention
upon the clouds and the snow, on rocks and on (see e.g. Gebelein 2001; Liedtke 2003), and various
mountains, and that offers a ‘key to higher things’. other aspects pertaining to e.g. > Christian theo-
The novel tells of a primordial master who under- sophy or kabbalah [+ Jewish Influences] have
stood the conjunction or interrelation of all living occasionally attracted the attention of scholars,
things: stars and men, stones and animals, clouds there does not as yet exist a systematic and com-
and plants. Heinrich von Ofterdingen is much prehensive study that clearly situates Novalis in the
closer to the conventional form of the novel. It tells contexts of Western esotericism. His influence on
of a young man named Heinrich who longs to see a later developments in that context, such as e.g. >
‘blue flower’ (possibly inspired by the blue flower Anthroposophy, would merit study as well.
of wisdom described in an anonymous alchemical
text Pandora [1588]; see Gebelein 2001, 296) HKA (Historisch Kritische Ausgabe) = Novalis,
spoken of by a traveling stranger who speaks of Schrifte: Die Werke Friedrich von Hardenbergs (Paul

--- Page 295 ---
871 NOVIKOV
Kluckhohn & Richard Samuel, eds.), Stuttgart, 1960-; Universitat, 1966 ¢ Kristin Pfefferkorn, Novalis:
Bd. 1: Das Dichterische Werk (1960; 3rd_ rev. A Romantic’s Theory of Language and Poetry,
ed. 1977); Bd. 2: Das philosophische Werk 1(1975; 3rd New Haven & London: Yale University Press,
rev. ed. 1981); Bd. 3; Das philosophische Werk 1988 @ Gabrielle Rommel, Geheimnisvolle Zeichen:
IT (1968; 3rd rev. ed. 1983); Bd. 4: Tagebiicher, Brief- Alchemie, Magie, Mystik und Natur bei Novalis, Peter
wechsel, Zeitgendssische Zeugnisse (1975); Bd. 5: Lang, 1998 ¢ E. Spenlé, Novalis: Essai sur Vidéalisme
Materialien und Register (1988) ¢ Engl. editions: Romantique en Allemagne, Paris: Hachette, 1903 ¢
Novalis, Philosophical Writings (Margaret Stoljar, Ulrich Stadler, “Esoterisch und exoterisch: Popular-
transl.), Albany: SUNY Press, 1997 # Pollen and Frag- isierungsversuche bei Jean Paul, Novalis und Heinrich
ments (Arthur Versluis, transl.), Grand Rapids: Phanes Heine”, in: Markus Winkler (ed.), Heinrich Heine und
Press, 1989. die Romantik, Tiibingen: Max Niemeyer, 1997, 57-71
¢ Ludwig Stockinger, ““Tropen und Ratselsprache’:
Lit.: Maurice Besset, Novalis et la pensée mystique, Esoterik und Offentlichkeit bei Friedrich von Harden-
Paris: Aubier, 1947 # Roger Cardinal, “Werner, berg (Novalis)”, in: Miller, Pasternack, Segebrecht
Novalis and the Signature of Stones”, in: Brigitte & Stockinger, o.c., 182-206 ¢ Herbert Uerlings,
Schludermann et al. (eds), Deutung und Bedeutung: Friedrich von Hardenberg, genannt Novalis: Werk und
Studies in German and Comparative Literature, The Foschung, Stuttgart: J.B. Metzlersche Verlagsbuch-
Hague, 1973, 118-133 @ Pierre Deghaye, De Paracelse handlung, r991 ¢ idem (ed.), Novalis und die Wissen-
a Thomas Mann: Les avatars de I’hermétisme alle- schaften, Tubingen: Max Niemeyer, 1997.
mand, Paris: Dervy, 2000, 384-438 Bruce Haywood,
Novalis: The Veil of Imagery, ’s-Gravenhage: Mouton, WOUTER J. HANEGRAAFF & ARTHUR VERSLUIS
1959 @ Friedrich Hiebel, Novalis: Der Dichter der
blauen Blume, Minchen: Leo Lehnen, 1951 ¢ Andreas
B. Kilcher, Die Sprachtheorie der Kabbala als dstheti- Novikov, Nikolay Ivanovich,* 27.4 [8.5,
sches Paradigma: Die Konstruktion einer dsthetischen New Style] 1744 Avdotino (Bronnitsky
Kabbala seit der Friihen Neuzeit, Stuttgart/Weimar: district, near Moscow, Russia), ¢ 31.7
J.B. Metzler, 1998, 273-279, 281-290, 297-301 ¢ Ralf
[12.8] 1818 Avdotino
Liedtke, “Hardenbergs Chemo-Technik: Romanti-
sches Naturdenken im Geiste von Alchemie und Her-
metik”, in: Rommel, Geheimnisvolle Zeichen (see The best-known Russian journalist, book editor
below), 119-132 idem, Das romantische Paradigma and Freemason of the 18th century, Nikolay
der Chemie: Friedrich von Hardenbergs Naturphiloso- Ivanovich Novikov was born in a family belonging
phie zwischen Empirie und alchemistischer Spekula- to the middle-class nobility, and raised in their
tion, Paderborn: Mentis, 2003 ¢ Hans-Joachim Mahl, modest estate, Avdotino, located near Moscow. He
Die Idee des Goldenen Zeitalters im Werk des Novalis,
received a quite poor education in the French col-
Heidelberg: C. Winter, 1965 @ idem, The Critical For-
lege of Moscow University and was even expelled
tunes of a Romantic Novel: Novalis’s Heinrich von
Ofterdingen, Columbia, SC: Camden House, 1994 ¢ from it for repeated absence. Following family tra-
idem, Friedrich von Hardenbeg (Novalis), Weimar: dition, he joined the Izmailovskij regiment of the
J.B. Metzler, 2001 # Paola Mayer, Jena Romanticism Imperial Guards. During his service the regiment
and its Appropriation of Jakob Béhme: Theosophy - took active part in a military putsch that brought
Hagiography — Literature, Montreal & Kingston, Lon- Catherine II to the Russian throne in 1762.
don, Ithaca: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1999,
Appointed as secretary at the Legal Committee,
76-95 # Géza von Molnar, Romantic Vision, Ethical
formed by Catherine to prepare a liberal legal Context: Novalis and Artistic Autonomy, Minnea-
polis: University of Minneapolis Press, 1987 # idem, reform in 1767, he had a unique opportunity to get
Novalis, Boston: Twayne, 1980 ¢ Ayako Nakai, “Die an overview of the state of the Russian empire and
zwei Grundkrafte der Natur bei Eckartshausen und participate in the nation-wide debate about the
Novalis im Vergleich mit der chinesischen Natur- 18th century’s most acute socio-political questions.
philosophie”, in: Klaus-Detlef Miller, Gerhard Paster- This experience could probably explain the fact
nack, Wulf Segebrecht & Ludwig Stockinger (eds.),
that in 1768 he retired from the guard, with the
Geschichtlichkeit und Aktualitat: Studien zur deut-
firm intention of starting his own magazine. schen Literatur seit der Romantik, Tubingen: Max
Niemeyer, 1988, 159-181 @ idem, “Andreaes Chymi- Novikov’s satirical magazines of 1769-1774
sche Hochzeit und Novalis”, Goethe-Jahrbuch der have exerted an enormous influence over the
Goethe-Gesellschaft in Japan 35 (1993), 113-138 ¢ emerging Russian public opinion. A legendary
John Neubauer, Bifocal Vision: Novalis’ Philosophy of quarrel between his first magazine Truten (Drone;
Nature and Disease, Chapel Hill: University of North 1769-70) and the official Vsiakaja Vsiatchina (All
Carolina Press, 1971 # William Arctander O’Brien,
Sorts and Sundries; 1769) edited by Catherine II
Novalis: Signs of Revolution, Durham: Duke Univer-
sity Press, 1995 @ Carl Paschek, Der Einfluss Jacob herself, where Novikov openly criticized imperial
Bohmes auf das Werk Friedrich von Hardenbergs initiatives — especially that of “sponsored” French
(Novalis), Bonn: Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms- cultural influence on Russian society — marked the

--- Page 296 ---
NOVIKOV 872
first public clash between Russian intellectuals and attributed by public opinion to the Freemasons, led
the government. These events stood at the begin- to a climate close to paranoia at the Russian court.
ning of a process in the course of which Russian The police reported to Catherine about a secret
autocracy would lose its progressive impetus inher- correspondence of Russian Freemasons with
ited from Peter I (The Great; reigned 1682-1725) Woellner: at that time a minister of Emperor
and become a restraining and eventually a repres- Friedrich II of Prussia, an enemy of Catherine, and
sive force. a Freemason. This correspondence revealed that
Novikov’s satirical magazines were followed by certain Russian lodges were organizationally sub-
a series of Masonic periodicals from 1777 to 1785. ordinated to foreign authority. Among the ad-
The best known among them — Utrennij Svet (The dressees was Novikov, who appeared to hold the
Morning Light; 1777-1780) — became one of the key position in Russian Freemasonry during the
most widely distributed Russian periodicals of 1790S.
the 18th century. In 1779, thanks to a eminent Novikov and three of his close collaborators
Russian freemason, M.M. Heraskov (1733-1807), were quickly arrested, publishing houses were
he obtained a ro-year’s lease of Moscow University closed, and books were confiscated. Based on
Press. In 1783 Catherine II issued a decree “On the incriminating evidence about secret exchanges
Free Publishing Houses” which allowed Novikov with Prussian officials and the Duke of Braun-
to realize an old dream, expressed already in one schweig, to whom they had pledged their alle-
of his satirical magazines (Zhivopisetz [Painter]; giance, they were convicted for disloyalty towards
1772-1773): a private book publishing company. the Sovereign. They were also found guilty of
Between 1783 and 1791 Novikov’s “Typographic spreading teachings in conflict with the tradition of
Company” came to control five publishing houses, the Orthodox Church, and of illegal publication of
issuing 950 book titles (i.e., one third of all books books prohibited by the Church authorities. Sen-
published in Russia at that time). The Company tenced to fifteen years of imprisonment, Novikov
was created by the “Friendly Scientific Society” was released four and a half years later by Cathe-
founded a year before by Novikov and L.-G. rine’s successor Paul I, on the first day of his reign.
Schwartz. Novikov never resumed his public activity and died
From the very beginning, all of these activities in 1818.
were devoted to philanthropic and educational The major components of Novikov’s personal
purposes on a large scale, but the “enlightened des- ideology, which would later determine his specific
pot” Catherine II, who intended to keep control approach to Freemasonry and the original path
over the products of her liberal reforms, could charted by him, can already be found in his satiri-
hardly tolerate such a blossoming of private initia- cal magazines, as pointed out by Pypin in 1916.
tive, especially on behalf of Russian Freemasons: if Monnier’s detailed analysis of Novikov’s pre-
at the beginning of her reign she just considered > Masonic period (1981) confirms this conclusion
Freemasonry a ‘childish game’, later on she became and points out the major components of his com-
increasingly suspicious of a Masonic political con- plex outlook, the most noticeable characteristic
spiracy. At several occasions she quite violently of which is Novikov’s violent opposition to the
countered attempts of Russian freemasons to foreign (especially French) influence over Russian
influence her son Grand Duke Paul (the future Paul society. Against the hedonism and eudemonism of
I), and she was also concerned about the reports of the Enlightenment, Novikov preached the virtues
the secret police revealing far-reaching connections of traditional ethics. The concept of Enlightenment
established by Russian lodges with Swedish and, philosophy found in his satirical magazines was
later, Prussian officials. In practice the official atti- somewhat limited, and his passionate antagonism
tude was becoming more and more hostile and in against the Philosophes was rather naive and lack-
1785 the “Typographic Company” and Novikov’s ing in solid argumentation. These foreign teachings
residence were searched by imperial order and sev- were, according to Novikov, totally alien to Russ-
eral banned titles were requisitioned. ian society; assuming a not very subtle nationalist
The French Revolution and the execution of position, he therefore developed an apology of
Louis XVI, which Catherine II took as a personal Russian “traditional” ways and Russia’s “glori-
threat, seemed to confirm her in her opinion about ous” past. In order to give a more solid foundation
the political danger represented by Freemasonry. In to this perspective, Novikov initiated serious
1792, the sudden death of the emperor Leopold II research projects and a series of scientific editions,
of Austria, followed shortly after by the murder of intended to revalorize traditional Russian culture
king Gustav III of Sweden, both of which were and national history.

--- Page 297 ---
873 NOVIKOV
It is in Freemasonry that Novikov found an ally sentative of Russian Freemasonry, obtained for
in his struggle against the acculturation of Russia Russia the new administrative status of “8th
by foreign influences: in 1775, his friends con- Province” within the existing structure (which
vinced him to become a Freemason, and he joined divided Europe in Provinces according to the
the “English system” lodge “Urania”. He was ancient Order of the Temple). This meant not only
looking for instruction and spiritual support for his recognition, but also a certain amount of auton-
ideas; and henceforth his itinerary as a Freemason omy in research.
would be marked by a pursuit of knowledge as well During one of his travels, Schwartz joined the
as moral and spiritual improvement. However, the “Rosicrucian Order of the Ancient System” that
Russian version of the “English” system in the was rapidly expanding within German Strict
1770s could not really satisfy his needs, and like so Observance loges. At the same occasion he was
many other Freemasons, Novikov embarked on a empowered to promote the Order in Russia and
quest for “true” Freemasonry. Already in 1776 he was nominated as its regional supervisor. The
became Grand Master of the Lantona lodge in St membership list of the first Rosicrucian lodge,
Petersburg, a lodge based upon Reichel’s system, established in 1782 in Moscow as a result, in fact
that had been introduced in Russia in 1771. The provides us with the best overview of what can
rite was based on Zinnendorf’s (Ellenberg’s) sys- considered the “Novikov circle”: Novikov him-
tem, and had four high degrees in addition to the self (he assumed leadership of the new system in
blue ones. Close to the Rite of Strict Observance (a 1784, after the death of I.-G. Schwartz), Mihail
quite popular German rite based upon the Knights Heraskov (1733-1807), Piotr Tatischev (1730-
Templar filiation), this was a Chivalrous system of 1810), Nicolas Troubezkoy (1744-1821), Ivan
a Christian nature; but other than in the case of the Tourgenev (1752-1808), Aleksej Kutuzov (1749-
Strict Observance, the additional four Chivalric 1797), ~ Ivan Lopukhin (1756-1816), Semion
Degrees were clearly marked by an emphasis on the Gamaleja (1743-1822), and Vasilij Chulkov
occult, including the use of alchemic symbolism [> (1746-1807).
Alchemy] of transmutation and some elements of Even though the archives contain evidence of
thaumaturgy. The personality and ideas of George disagreements between them, the members of this
von Reichel (a German Freemason, member the circle definitely shared a common ideological plat-
Lodge “To the Three Golden Keys” of Berlin, form in Novikov’s periodic editions, in which they
appointed as teacher at the St. Petersburg Military actively participated: Utrennij Svet (The Morn-
School, and an important founder of Lodges in ing Light, 1777-1780, orig. St. Petersburg; from
Russia) exerted a strong influence on Novikov: in April 1779 Moscow), Moskovskoje Ezhemesja-
fact, during their first exchange of ideas, both men choe Izdanije (Moscow Monthly Edition, 1781),
were moved to tears. Vechern’aja Zarja (The Sunset, 1782), Pokojaschi-
Step by step a so-called “Novikov Circle” jsa Troudolubetz (Resting Worker, 1784-1785).
formed around Novikov, the members of which Their specific outlook, as emerging from the set of
were to play a role in most major Masonic activi- these publications taken as a whole (they are com-
ties in Russia at the end of the 18th century. They posed of translations, notes, comments and origi-
participated in Novikov’s Masonic periodicals, nal texts) still awaits thorough analysis, but even
worked as translators, publishers, editors and com- cursory perusal reveals the quite interesting and
mentators. While belonging to different Masonic well-developed esoteric ideology of the members of
rites, they were all in search of the “True Free- Novikov’s circle. One of their goals was to make
masonry” and shared a common quest for “real” available in Russian the most fundamental writings
enlightenment, conceived of as a union between of Western esotericism (including ~ Arnold, >
Faith and Reason, science and religion, and as a Weigel, -> Paracelsus, Arndt, > Fludd, and >
path towards moral and spiritual self-improvement Boehme), and even to make some of these appear in
as human beings, patriots and Christians. periodical editions. As emphasized by Novikov in
The Lodge Harmony, founded in Moscow his foreword to Utrennij svet, ‘With our work we
in 1780 by Novikov, I.-G. Schwartz and N. aspire to touch the very soul of our co-citizens’.
Troubezkoy, was an attempt at transcending the Essential to his opposition against the Enlighten-
differences between Masonic rites and finding the ment, was his belief that the education of mind and
essence of the Masonic quest. At this time, Russian spirit should go along with the transmutation of a
Freemasons were seeking more independence from person’s entire being.
foreign Masonic institutions; and at the Congress Novikov’s early nationalism, expressed in his
in Wilhelmsbad (1782), I.-G. Schwartz, as repre- satirical magazines and later shaped by his spiritual

--- Page 298 ---
NOVIKOV 874
convictions, makes him oppose an idealized “tradi- N.I Novikov, St Petersburg: Izd-vo imeni N.I. N.a,
tional Russian society” of the past to the “cor- 1994.
rupted modernity” of the 18th century. But in the
Lit.: André Monnier, Un publiciste frondeur sous
course of his spiritual evolution he does not fall
Catherine II: Nicolas Novikov, Paris: Institut d’études
under the spell of apocalyptic eschatology and slaves, 1981 # A.I. Nezelenov, N.I Novikov — izdatel
chooses a more optimistic theosophical path. zhurnalov 1769-1785, St Petersburg: Tip. V.S. Bala-
Nowadays his position would be characterized as sheva, 1875 ¢ G.P. Makogonenko, Nikolas Novikovi
evolutionist. Novikov and his friends were in fact russkoe Prosveshenie XVIII, Moscow: Goslitizdat,
the major factor in an atmosphere of cultural 1951 @ W. Gareth Jones, Nicolas Novikov: Enlight-
ener of Russia. University of Cambridge: Cambridge
Renaissance which became evident in 18th century
University Press, 1984 ¢ I.E. Martynov, Knigoizdatel
Russia. The arts and sciences were among their
Nikolaj Novikov, Moscow: Kniga, 1981 # S.M.
primary interests: Novikov’s periodicals also Nekrasov, Apostol, Moscow: Russkij Put, 1994 ¢
published works by Gellert, Wieland, Young, von H. Keipert, Neue Quellen zu Novikov‘s “Utrennyi
Kleist, Gessner, Bacon, Erasmus, and Montesquieu svet”, Sonderdruck Zeitschrift fiir slavische Philologie,
as well as classics such as Plato, Plutarch and Heidelberg, 1984 ¢ M. Longinov, Novikov i Schwarz,
Seneca. Moscow, 1885 ¢idem, Novikov i moskouskie martin-
isty, Moscow, Tip. Gracheva, 1867. A.N. Pypin,
Of particular interest in Novikov’s legacy is
Rousskoje masonstvo, Petrograd: Ogni, 1916 @ G.V.
a fifty-volume collection compiled mostly by Vernadskij, Russkoje masonstvo v tsarstvovanie Eka-
Novikov and Gamaleja during the 181o0’s and teriny II, St Petersburg: Izdatelstvo imeni N. Novikova,
labelled as Library containing some hermetic, kab- 1999 @ The only published index of the “Library”
balistic, magical and other books; as well as writ- compiled by N. and Gamaleja in the 18 ros is available
ings of the true Freemasons of the ancient systems. as an annex to G.V. Vernadskij, Russkoje masonstvo v
Collected and compiled in Russian from various tsarstvovanie Ekateriny II, \zdatelstvo imeni N. Novi-
kova, 1999.
translations. This “library” represents an original
perspective by Russian humanists and Freemasons
ALEX LAZAR-OVTCHINNIKOV
on the basic referential corpus of modern esoteri-
cism. Among other things, it contains Russian
translations of the Corpus Hermeticum, Angelus Number Symbolism
Silesius, > von Haugwitz, Hirsch, Kirchweger, >
Llull, Retzel, and — Saint-Martin, followed by 1. PYTHAGOREANISM 2. PLATO
numerous original writings by Gamaleja, Novikov, AND PLATONISM 3. AUGUSTINE
Lopukhin, Scovoroda (1722-1794), and I. Tur- 4. MIDDLE AGES 5. RENAISSANCE
genev. Novikov’s life was a practical confirmation 6. FROM THE 18TH CENTURY ON
of his ideas. While consciously “working on them-
selves” (which was understood as a form of eso- Number symbolism, also known as the qualita-
teric praxis), Novikov and his friends deeply tive approach to number and mathematical objects
transformed Russian citizens and society, and thus in general, constitutes a universal cultural phenom-
lay foundations for the blossoming of Russian cul- enon and has existed from time immemorial. As
ture in the r9th century. such, it must be envisaged strictly apart from the
so-called “numerology” which has emerged as
A full re-edition of Novikov’s satirical magazines is its contemporary offshoot and is really, at best, an
available in: Satiricheskije zhurnaly N.I. Novikova / illegitimate child and, moreover, a mere waste-
Satirical magazines of N.I. Novikov, Moscow - product of post-modern consumerism.
Leningrad: Institut Russkoj Literatury, 1951 # Utren-
Within western culture, to which we shall natu-
nij Svet, ezhemesjachnoje izdanie / Morning Light,
rally limit ourselves here, open considerations
monthly, St Petersburg: printed in Land Forces Corps,
1777-1780 (from April 1779: Moscow, University pertaining to “qualitative number” first appear
Press of N. Novikov) ¢ Moskovskoje Ezhemesjachoe with the Greeks. As a matter of fact, and difficult
Izdanije |!Moscow Monthly Edition, Moscow: Univer- to explain though it may seem to us, no Egyptian
sity Press of N. Novikov, 1781 @ Vecherniaja Zaria / or Babylonian/Assyrian document featuring ex-
The Sunset, Moskow: University Press of N. Novikov, plicit “number-symbolical” speculations actually
1782 Pokojaschijsa Troudolubetz/ Resting Worker,
survives (assuming any ever existed). Since some
Moscow: University Press of N. Novikov, 1784-1785
authors find this fact hard to adjust to, the book ¢ The re-editions of selected works by N. are available
in: N.I. Novikov: Izbrannyje sochinenija / N.I. market is continuously flooded with inept claims to
Novikov: Selected works, Moscow — Leningrad: Gosli- the contrary, that is, for instance, to the discovery
tizdat, 1951 ¢ Pis’ma N.I. Novikova / Letters of of the sacred geometrical meaning hidden in the

--- Page 299 ---
875 NUMBER SYMBOLISM
structure of the Gizeh Pyramids, or some such fan- quite likely to have influenced Plato. It is in a frag-
tasy. Needless to say — as is the case with e.g. ment by Archytas, handed down to us by Por-
“the number of destiny in your name” — such phyry that the arithmetic, geometric and harmonic
claims hardly concern us here. means are first explicitly treated as relevant to >
Even taking into account the lack of material music. From the notions of Limit/Unlimited,
evidence mentioned above, there can in fact be respectively assimilated to the mathematical cate-
little doubt that, in the field of number symbolism gories of odd and even, Philolaos derives an entire
as well as in many others, the Greeks are heirs to cosmology in which Nature as a whole (and every
earlier, middle-eastern civilizations. The kind of single component of it) is merely an aspect of one
correlative thinking which mathematical symbol- of these principles, as well as an expression of their
ism mainly depends on, with its full-fledged use mutual complementarity. Both principles are, in
of analogy and its conception of the universe as fact, viewed as the intelligible manifestation(s) of
a multi-layered living organism, corresponding — the supreme and universal One.
in terms of structure — to individual human beings According to Proclus (Commentary on the First
and laid out according to a continuous cognitive/ Book of Euclid’s Elements, 24-30), Philolaos also
ontological scale, pertains to a type of “wisdom’ used to establish symbolic correlations between
which most certainly predates the era of Pythago- certain olympian deities — three feminine and four
ras. For it is Pythagoras (around 570-490 B.C.) masculine — and each respective angle of the
whose name has become to our day (and already square (4) and triangle (3), thus alluding to the sov-
was in ancient Greece) almost synonymous with ereignty of the “universal” number twelve (4 x 3),
“number symbolism” (along with vegetarianism referring to almighty Zeus. Assuming its attribu-
and metempsychosis [> Reincarnation]). tion to Philolaos to be correct, this is perhaps the
earliest example known to us of a “geometrical the-
1. PYTHAGOREANISM ology” akin, in many respects, to similar specula-
If the pythagorean school, which is likely to have tions elaborated during the hellenistic period. In his
disappeared as such around the end of the 4th cen- classic history of pythagorean literature, A. Delatte
tury B.C., is generally well known for its mathe- underscored the apparent shift from mathematics
matical achievements, it largely owes this studied in themselves and with respect to natural
reputation to Aristotle’s testimony and to middle- phenomena, to the consideration of their mytho-
and neoplatonic doxography. It would appear logical transpositions; but whether this shift does
from these sources that the Pythagoreans were in correspond to an historical reality, or is merely sug-
fact mainly concerned with giving a philosophical gested by the dificient state of our documentation,
account of the “first principles”, under numerical is difficult to decide. It seems nonetheless hard to
guise. But it is frequently impossible to clearly imagine a complete absence of such “divine”
distinguish between the actual origin of certain analogies in the works (most of them lost) of earlier
pythagorean doctrines and the systematic devel- writers of that school, for whom religion and rit-
opment thereof by later thinkers, just as it is often ual, number theory, ethics, geometry, physics,
hard to draw a sharp line between mathematical music and politics were in effect inseparable.
discoveries proper, in the euclidean or modern Due to the important focus on cosmology, the
sense, and number-symbolical speculations; all the most meaningful numbers in this earliest period
more so since the two were never, for a long time, are, besides the septenary (which represents a basic
completely divorced from one another. Moreover, structural feature) and — possibly — the quinary (see
whether such discoveries or tenets corresponded Mattei), the tetraktys and the decad, as two levels
in fact to collective elaborations within the whole of expansion from the primordial Unity. Narrowly
school, over a period of time, or rather resulted related (since 1+2+3+4 = 10), these two respec-
from the research of individual members, is fre- tively correspond to the cosmogonical and syn-
quently uncertain. The mixture of “scientific” and thetic perspectives on Nature, just as they figure the
symbolic preoccupations which seems to be a fundamental intervals of the musical scale (1 =
trademark of the movement from its inception, tonic, 4/3 = fourth, 3/2 = fifth, 2 = octave), i.e. the
resulting in the doctrine of a cosmic harmony harmony of the world and its immanent presence
based, like the musical one, on a network of numer- within the soul (following the macro-microcosm
ical > correspondences, is present in both Philo- analogy). Philolaos thus avails himself of such cor-
laos of Croton (fl. ca 450 B.C.) and Archytas of respondences to elaborate a theory of four-fold
Tarento (around 430-360 B.C.). These are the two anthropological principles, and of the cognitive
most important figures of the early period, both faculties of the soul-harmony — akin in nature to

--- Page 300 ---
NUMBER SYMBOLISM 876
the Whole and capable of grasping it through the Academy. Shared for instance by Speusippus and
agency of logos — which will exert an influence Xenocrates, Plato’s two immediate successors, and
on Plato. frequently underlined by Aristotle (who sternly
opposed it), this preoccupation made a strong
2. PLATO AND PLATONISM reappearance in the thought of the later, so-called
Ever since Antiquity, Plato’s (428/7-387/6 B.C.) neopythagoreans of the 2nd century A.D. and
philosophy was often dubbed “pythagorean” and onward, such as Numenius of Apamea, Nico-
understood as imbued with such conceptions. Such machus of Gerasa, Moderatus of Gades, Theon of
associations are fundamentally mistaken, as Plato is Smyrna, or Anatolius, not to mention Iamblichus
in fact concerned with mathematics conceived or Proclus. Each of these writers represents, in his
of as “the language of cosmology” (L. Brisson); a own way, a specific blend of middle- or > neopla-
language relying, in his case, not on hackneyed tonism and neopythagoreanism, typical of the
numerical analogies, but on the fact that mathe- philosophical eclecticism widespread at the time.
matical entities detain the power of eliciting a Both the symbolic, inductive approach to number
rational description of nature. In order to bridge the and the deductive one, along with “scientific”
gap between the immutable realm and the material applications, coexist in their writings. But lambli-
world, subject to change, Plato introduces, as man- chus (around 245-325 A.D.) and Proclus (412-485
ifesting an intermediary order of reality, a series of A.D.) belong to a later period in which neoplaton-
“musical” proportions structuring the world-soul, ism, though established as a long-standing school
which is itself a middle-term between the intelligible equipped with a structured course of studies, nev-
Forms and the corpus mundi. For him, it is a given ertheless tended to become more and more of a the-
fact that physical reality can only be understood, up ology. On its theurgic, ritual side, numbers serve as
to a point, inasmuch as it “accepts” and retains one of the mainstays of a “sacramental” approach
some kind of mathematical relation(s). Following to Nature, in which each level of being provides
the same logic, a precise polyhedral shape is a rung sustaining the gradual ascension of the
ascribed, in the Timaeus, to each of the four ele- soul towards direct contact with divine entities;
ments; and each one of these shapes is in turn com- concurrently, numbers represent the intellectual
posed of invisible and indestructible “particles”, of offering par excellence, something the soul must
a geometrical nature (triangles). Number, geometry eventually sacrifice to the higher deities, in order to
and proportion thus represent a certain measure of transmute all cosmological bonds which fetter its
order, harmony and causality introduced by the essentially spiritual essence. Geometrical figures,
world-soul into the fundamental transiency of tan- considered as having extension according to the
gible things; if this were not the case, the latter three dimensions of space, participate in this
would remain inaccessible to discursive knowledge. process of salvation, which ultimately includes
If it is reasonable to assume that the constituent Nature’s physical aspects, through the correlative
“harmonic” intervals of the universal soul, or the three-dimensional “universalization” of the soul,
analogy between elements and geometrical bodies, which coincides with its repatriation into the divine
may well represent platonic echoes of “pythagor- realm. Other practical facets of such an esoteric use
ean” themes (as does the association of propor- of mathematics seem to have enjoyed less wide-
tional means to justice and/or social order |Gorgias spread favour, like the association (much more
508a, Laws V 737¢; 744b, etc], as well as to differ- familiar in semitic cultures) of number and letter
ent types of political regimes — a souvenir from symbolism (i.e. taking into account the numerical
Archytas), the intent is nevertheless quite obviously value, and sometimes the geometrical shape or
different. Plato distances himself from his predeces- alphabetical rank, of letters) emerging in Plutarch’s
sors by trying to apply mathematics to physics with On the E at Delphi (ca. 115 A.D.), in some of the
the aim of laying the logical foundations of a gen- extant fragments of Theodore of Asinea (mainly
eral ontology, and of a rational philosophy of quoted by Iamblichus — who sharply criticizes such
knowledge. Even the famous enigma of the “Nup- methods! — and by Proclus in his In Timceum), in
tial Number” (Rep. VIII 548b), dealing with the the 4th-century Theology of Arithmetic or in pas-
determination of the cycles commanding divine and sages from Damascius (ca. 470-535 A.D.). On the
human generations, fails to refer us to “traditional” more scholarly side, in order to exactly understand
pythagorean arithmology. the mathematical tenets contained in Plato’s dia-
Merging the platonic and “pythagorean” out- logues (an obviously important part of its cur-
looks on the interplay between mathematics and riculum), and in order to ascribe to mathematics
philosophy was a prominent concern in the early their correct place within the general hierarchy of

--- Page 301 ---
877 NUMBER SYMBOLISM
knowledge and, accordingly, assess the objective by explaining Scripture and rendering its contents
ontological status of number, the later strands accessible to them; according to his views, nothing
of neoplatonism consciously “pythagorized” the may of course be considered superfluous in the
philosophical approach to reality. Within such a sacred text, least of all the numerical passages
shift, the production of manuals and commentaries which, he contends, are essential to a better and
on earlier scientific textbooks (by Euclid, Nico- deeper grasp of biblical meanings. Based on the
machus or Ptolemy) began playing an important triple authority of Scripture itself (as divinely
role, and a strong emphasis was put concurrently inspired), the Tradition of the Church (which war-
on number as representing both an image of meta- rants interpretation) and reason (analysis of arith-
physical principles, and the intimate pattern of metical properties), enhanced by his own immense
physical reality. It is almost impossible to overstate prestige as a preacher and theologian, his exeget-
the influence of these views on the patristic, ical efforts consider number mainly as an inter-
medieval and Renaissance understanding of math- pretative tool, as a sacramentum indicative of a
ematics and of their symbolic meaning. subtler, more spiritual significance behind the lit-
eral meaning of the Bible. Number-symbolic devel-
3. AUGUSTINE opments thus appear scattered throughout his
The general threefold orientation of ancient many works, generally attuned both to the scrip-
greek arithmology, consisting of cosmological, eth- tural context to which they belong and to the par-
ical and/or theological transpositions of number(s), ticular ends of a specific writing of his. Eventually
was retained for the most part by early Christian our man, availing himself of the inexhaustible
thought. But obvious adaptations were needed polysemy of symbols, never hesitates to present
since Scripture, now, above the rationale of mathe- several differing explanations of a given number.
matics or philosophy, had taken over as the novel One key feature for understanding Augustine’s
paradigm of numerical signification. The “divine arithmology is conveyed in the famous sentence:
inspiration” of the books composing the Bible was ‘Therefore we cannot say that the number six is
of course interpreted as implying that the numbers perfect because God perfected all his works in six
they contained must have a spiritual relevance. days, but that God perfected his works in six days
Moreover, the inescapable fact that most of these because the number six is perfect’ (De Gen. ad litt.,
numbers did not by any means remain limited to IV, 7). Another fundamental aspect resides in the
the primary “Decad”, sacred to the ancient Greeks, frequent trinitarian analogies developed between
meant that the original framework of number the Godhead and creation, and exemplified by a
symbolism now had to adapt to much broader well-known quotation from the Book of Wisdom
perspectives and materials. The variety of biblical (XI, 20): ‘Thou hast disposed all things according
texts which happen to feature numerical data or to measure, number and weight’. In both cases,
measurements (dealing with theology, cosmology, the underlying theme is that the participation of
history and chronology, liturgy, eschatology and creatures in the divine nature implies that a cer-
prophecy), combined with the doctrines of typol- tain order, rhythm, proportion and harmony is
ogy and of multi-layered meanings within Scrip- imparted to the universe, through the divinely
ture, only confirmed the necessity of a wider system ordained regency of number. Such views are intrin-
of hermeneutics applied to number. To all this sically not new, as we have seen above. If, seen
should be added the array of different tasks incum- in this light, the mathematical archetypes are no
bent on the Christian interpreter: catechism, moral longer represented by the platonic “Forms and
edification, preaching, biblical commentary, spiri- Ideal Numbers”, they become “essences” coexist-
tual teaching or meditations addressing various ing within the divine mens and, as such, presiding
types of audience. over the creation. However, one may easily observe
Even though > Augustine (354-430 A.D.) is that, according to both doctrines, numbers never-
obviously not the first example of a strong interest theless continue to reflect higher principles, as well
in number symbolism within the Latin Church as serve as models of the lower levels of reality.
(one only has to remember Tertullian or Cyprian in Yet, although influenced by neoplatonism like the
Africa, Ambrose of Milan or Jerome in Europe — rest of Augustine’s general thinking, his number-
not to mention some of their Greek predecessors, symbolical speculations never depart from an
like —- Clement of Alexandria, Origen, or Ire- exclusively Christian perspective, structured at
naeus), he offers a remarkable case in point for the least in part around threefold correspondences,
new situation outlined above. A bishop first of and delineated before him by Ambrose in the fol-
all, his main goal consists in edifying his brethren lowing way: ‘We do not treat it [i.e. the Septenary]

--- Page 302 ---
NUMBER SYMBOLISM 878
according to the pythagorean manner or that of the much more important and influential Liber num-
other philosophers, but according to the form and erorum attributed to Isidore of Sevilla (¢ 636) -
divisions of spiritual grace’ (Ep. XLIV). Even the certainly the main treatise of the kind before the
classic greek procedure of interpreting numbers by work of Eriugena (t ca. 870).
first reducing them to Unity, or at least to one of the
digits composing the first decad, is retained, but 4. MIDDLE AGES
this reduction is now construed as illustrating both One of the foremost theologians of the latin
the divine immanence within beings, which war- Church, > Johannes Scottus Eriugena stands at
rants their existence, and the eventual final return the crossing of all cultural currents of his time.
of these to the Godhead. His principal work, the lengthy Periphyseon (On
Unity, here, is understood not as a number in the Nature), as well as his commentaries, bear the
quantitative sense but as an immaterial monad, influence of three main strands: the greek theology
the most perfect entity besides God, its immediate of > Ps.-Dionysius Areopagita (6th c. AD) and
origin; 2 denotes separation and the breaking-up Maxim the Confessor (VIIth c. AD), both of whom
of unity, inherent to both love and knowledge; 3 he actually translated into latin; the western tradi-
is of course referred to the Trinity and is, more tion of Augustine, Isidore and the Carolingians
generally, the heavenly number of the soul, whereas (Alcuin, R. Maurus, Hincmar, Hilduin); and finally
4 is that of the body and of the material world, a that of “latin platonism” (Macrobius, Calcidius,
figure of firmness and solidity; 5 illustrates virgin- Martianus Capella, Boethius). For him, the rela-
ity and the five senses, instruments of the soul, and tions and properties of numbers, the manner in
6 — the first “perfect number” — the accomplish- which they emanate from the original monad
ment of creation (by reference to the six “days” of (unity), constitute a model of the way in which
Genesis); 7 symbolizes the perfection of creation, created things gradually come into being. Within
imaged by the Sabbath and the gifts of the Holy the monad, they retain their intrinsic, eternal
Ghost; the Kingdom and messianic era are figured nature; as they progress (along with the rest of cre-
by 8, whereas 9 is but the last step before the ation) towards material existence, they take upon
denary which, as 3+7, introduces the Decalog and themselves a created nature. God himself is the
expresses the ultimate achievement of all things; 12 uncreated monad, which the arithmetical one
is of course the number of the apostles, of the Elect mirrors on a lower plane. Such views obviously
(12 x 12 = 144) and of the spreading of the Gospel reflect a strong Christian-neoplatonic bias, within
(3 Trinity x 4 corners of the world); 40, of fasting which number is not just a textual metaphor or an
and penance; 50, of the Jubilee; and so on. interpretative tool, but an actuai entity playing a
In the De quantitate anime, in an attempt at regulating role in the overall ontological process.
describing the relations between the animating soul Eriugena also develops some remarkable analogies
and the body, Augustine explores the symbolism of about the cube and the number 8 (Exp. in Coel.
geometrical figures (circular or rectilinear, as two- Hierarch. V1, 165-98), or certain cosmological
dimensional images of the corporeal body) and of measures (Periphyseon Ill, inspired by Basil’s
their respective characteristics (number and sym- Hexaemeron and M. Capella, whose writings he
metry of angles and sides), to end up reducing them also commented).
progressively to the properties of the immaterial The interplay between cosmology and arithmol-
dot, akin in this respect to the soul, and to a “geo- ogy which certain treatises belonging to “latin pla-
metrical monad”, equivalent in its order to the tonism” manifest, whether stemming from pagan
numerical unity. (Macrobius, E. Favonius, Calcidius, M. Capella -
Augustine’s overall conception of arithmology 4th & 7th c. A.D.) or Christian (Boethius, t 524)
has exerted a deep and sustained influence on most authors, has had a considerable influence in the
later Christian writers on number symbolism, Middle Ages. Put forward and given prominence in
to the point that many of them, including (as we these texts are the themes of cosmic harmony and
shall see) some authors well-versed in esotericism the relation of musical intervals to significant num-
proper, merely repeat or closely depend on his bers, to which is attributed a positive role in struc-
interpretations. If his explicit wish of having a turing the world-soul, the heavenly spheres, the
lexicon of biblical numbers and their symbolic elementary components of physical reality and/or
meanings written down in his own time was not the fundamental cycles of human life into a general
fullfilled, partial attempts at such an endeavour unison. The philosophical tenets and arithmetical
may be recognised in the last chapter of Eucher data found within such works, classic though
of Lyon’s (¢ ca. 450) Liber formularum, or in the they are, did much to extol the importance of cos-

--- Page 303 ---
879 NUMBER SYMBOLISM
mological speculations, and convince medieval Making use, in various degrees, of these two
thinkers of the necessity to explore the book of approaches, and belonging all three to the circle
Genesis along such lines, as well as take into of the famous french Humanist > J. Lefevre d’Eta-
account the “mysteries of numbers” in the study ples (ca. 1455-1536), who touched on the subject
of the fabric of the universe as revealing divine himself in book II of his unpublished De magia
wisdom. naturali (written around 1493), C. de Bovelles
Scriptural hermeneutics, and the elaboration of (1479-1567), J. Clichtove (¢ 1543) and G. Roussel
what rapidly became known as “natural philoso- (+ 1550) published on number symbolism between
phy”, following the scholarly development of the t51o and 1521. The first mainly explores a vast
seven Liberal Arts in the wake of textbooks such as array of philosophical and mystical analogies
M. Capella’s Wedding of Mercurius and Philology, (Liber de XII numeris), whereas the second limits
are the principal goal of most medieval schools himself to an exegesis of numbers found in the bib-
which make use of mathematical analogies. Physics lical text (De mystica numerorum significatione),
and arithmetic are frequently subjected to theolog- based mostly on authors pertaining to the Christ-
ical transpositions, extending — especially within ian tradition, and the third adds an arithmological
the school of Chartres — beyond the traditional commentary to his new translation of Boethius’
symbolic use of numbers as, for instance, when ele- Arithmetics. All of them manifest a clear didactic
mentary operations (like addition or multiplica- purpose, in the attempt of structuring and harmo-
tion) are globally taken as reflecting the internal nizing the spiritual messages which they believe
“nature” of the Godhead, or the structure of its hidden in Christian ontology, in Scripture and in
relations with created beings. classical thought and cosmology, thanks to the
But here, as in the use of the so-called “platonic” symbolic transpositions of arithmetic.
means — within the Victorine and Franciscan The major exponents of Renaissance > magic
schools — to illustrate the links between the Persons have also put arithmology to an extensive use.
of the Trinity, the tie with esotericism is relatively From ~ Marsilio Ficino (1433-1499; Compen-
slender and difficult to establish properly. At the dium in Timaeum, 1496) to > Giordano Bruno
same time, and contrary to what one might readily (1548-1600; De monade, 1591), through > Henri-
think, detailed arithmological considerations as cus Cornelius Agrippa (1486-1535; De occulta
such are seldom present in medieval magical and/ philosophia, 1533), > John Dee (1527-1608; Pref-
or alchemical treatises; but simple geometrical ace to Euclid’s “Elements”, 1570) or Fabio Paolini
shapes (like the circle, triangle or square, as in Con- (Hebdomades, 1589), number is shown to sustain
stantinus or ps.-Llull, studied by B. Obrist) are a key role in the understanding of the fabric of the
sometimes taken as organizing the material com- universe as an expression of divine wisdom and
binations of the elements and leading to the con- activity, whether understood in a platonic or a
templation of the spiritual principles of the Art. Christian sense. The intermediary character of
number on the general scale of being concords with
5. RENAISSANCE that of the human soul, which is preeminent in
Renaissance esoteric currents, which make an magical procedures, just like number itself is a fun-
extensive use of number symbolism, often blend damental constituent of ritual music and/or invo-
the classic qualitative analogies with an insistence cations and seals, through its shaping of musical
on the immaterial character of mathematical intervals and geometrical figures, and the numeri-
entities, supposedly apt to liberate the intellect cal values attributed to letters. Therefore the
from earthly preoccupations and help it reach the magus’ “creative imagination”, and the network of
intelligible realm, thus leaning on both the onto- dynamic correspondences linking it to the celestial
logical and cognitive aspects of number. Such an spiritus and to the world-soul, are both activated
approach, by assimilating the nature of thought into a universal consonance by the qualitative
processes to that of arithmo-geometrical tools and aspects of number.
procedures, entails some kind of “mathematizing” In and out of the Paracelsian movement [>
of reality, and of the dialectics on which its mental Paracelsianism], mathematical and musical analo-
apprehension rests. As the supreme warrant of the gies have been applied to > alchemy, in order to
numerical harmony of reality, the divine sphere illustrate the supposed correspondences with cos-
itself hardly remains immune to this tendency of mogony and eschatology evinced by the phases and
applying mathematical objects and reasoning to operations of the Great Work. At the same time,
the whole scale of being, and is therefore assimi- certain measures and weights (of temperature, sub-
lated to either unity, or the center, or the circle. stances, instruments) were given, by way of the

--- Page 304 ---
NUMBER SYMBOLISM 880
same symbolism, some anagogical significations, The idea of three worlds, composing a universal
and sometimes even parallelled with actual scrip- harmony based on 27, and reflecting hierarchically
tural passages featuring numerical data, or propor- the divine Unity which manifests itself externally
tioned to the human body. Examples of this may be through the number 3, structures the theosophical
found in John Dee’s Monas hieroglyphica (1564) approach to arithmology featured in > Robert
or the writings of Gérard Dorn (f after 1584); Fludd’s (1574-1637) Utriusque cosmi... historia
including the spurious Aurora of 1577. Even the (1617-1624). Knowledge of the divine sphere is
geometrical characteristics of the famous “pla- obtainable for mankind through that of the macro-
tonic” bodies have been interpreted in alchemical cosm, and the concept of proportion is central in
fashion, mostly by W. Davidson (+ 1669) in his the deciphering of the musical and mathematical
Philosophia pyrotechnica (1635), just as the pres- scales which organize the flow of the “life-force”
ence of the three paracelsian “principles” and four on the different planes.
traditional elements has triggered diverse arithmo- In 1584-1585 and 1665, respectively, P. Bongo
logical considerations. (t 1601) and the jesuit ~ Athanasius Kircher
With writers such as ~ Giovanni Pico della (1602-1680) published two great arithmological
Mirandola (1463-1494), ~ Johannes Reuchlin “summae”, ultimately considered textbooks of this
(1455-1522), > Francesco Giorgio (1466 ?-1540), particular genre. Under the titles Numerorum Mys-
~ Egidio da Viterbo (1465-1532) or > Guillaume teria and Arithmologia, they assert the divinely
Postel (1510-1581), the affinities between Christ- assigned regency of number upon the creation
ian kabbalah [> Jewish Influences III] and “pytha- and examine its manifold applications (exegetical,
goreanism” are given a wide display. Even if not magical, cryptographic, divinatory, etc.).
all of them go as far as Reuchlin himself, who
bluntly declared them identical (De arte cabbalis- 6. FROM THE 18TH CENTURY ON
tica, 1517), the themes of divine or angelic names, The shift in intellectual and spiritual perspective
closely associated with letter/numerical permuta- which affected the European world-view in the
tions, and of their role in the spiritual ascent of aftermath of the “scientific revolution” and during
the soul and the cleaving of the intellect to God, the “pre-Enlightenment” era contributed to the
are everywhere in evidence. Parallels are drawn gradual estrangement of number-symbolical specu-
between Greek and Jewish traditions, for instance lations from the mainstream of western culture. Its
between the tetraktys and merkavah (Chariot) a long-standing partnership with esoteric currents
propos the quaternary, or between the Decad and resulted in the name and practice of arithmology
the ten sefirot. Pico (Conclusiones, 1486) has done becoming a near synonym of “magic” and/or
much for the “formal” (qualitative) aspect of num- “kabbalah”, two disciplines henceforth consid-
ber to regain cultural favour, insisting on its impor- ered as obsolete and reeking of “superstition” and
tance as regards “natural philosophy” or theology, “obscurantism”. It is therefore not to be wondered
as well as highlighting its magical and kabbalistic at that “mystical arithmetic” was rather shunned
functions. Egidio da Viterbo stresses the interplay in academic circles and its cultivation mainly
of 3 (Trinity) and 10 (sefirot), before interpreting restricted to illuministic [> Illuminism] or pietist
the first ten numbers against a vast mosaic of bibli- [> Pietism] circles. Perhaps the most telling exam-
cal and kabbalistic quotations (Scechina, 1530). ple of this evolution is J.C. Lange’s (1668-1756)
Francesco Giorgio (De harmonia mundi, 1525) Theologia christiana in numeris (1702, 71734), a
builds up a complex metaphysical doctrine, based learned esoteric dissertation published, under a
on divine, cosmic and musical harmony, and on pseudonym, by a professor of logic and mathemat-
numbers, in which the One communicates itself to ics at the University of Francfort. The Theologia is
the material world through the angelic and celestial in fact an erudite attempt at ordering and inter-
spheres, which constitute a universal scale of 27 (3 preting some of the main articles of the Christian
x 9) spiritual degrees. Guillaume Postel interprets faith according to the pythagorean Decad, adorned
Plato in the light of Jewish mysticism, in showing with symbolic drawings of a declared theosophical
how the Nuptial Number and the myth of Er nature.
(Republic, VIII) are explained via the kabbalistic At the same time, and interestingly enough, the
theory of metempsychosis, or how the five platonic bulk of the literary production, in the domain of
bodies, associated with the numbers 3, 4 and 5, 18th-century arithmology, no longer comes from
actually mirror the structure of the messianic the “latin” countries, but belongs predominantly
“corner-stone” discussed in Scripture and in the to the German Sprachraum. One of its foremost
Zohar. exponents is - Karl von Eckartshausen (1752-

--- Page 305 ---
881 NUMBER SYMBOLISM
1803; Aufschliisse zur Magie [t. IV], 1792; Zahlen- succincte de la valeur symbolique des nombres”
lehre der Natur, 1795; Probaseologie, 1795), who (in appendix to his Ce que c’est que la Franche-
treats numbers essentially as “traces” of divine Maconnerie, 1802).
wisdom within Nature, with a view to conjoining But unquestionably the most meaningful expres-
scientific and theosophical thought, as well as sion of number symbolism in the same period (and
number symbolism and kabbalah, in a dual effort up to our own time) is found in German Roman-
towards illuminating the interplay of “life” and tic > Naturphilosophie. Among many examples,
“spirit” which make up the natural manifestations J. Malfatti’s Studien tiber Anarchie und Hierarchie
of the creative Word. For > Louis-Claude de Saint- des Wissens (1845) insists on the dynamic inter-
Martin (1743-1803), who resorts to numbers in penetration of metaphysics and quantitative sci-
most of his works (Des erreurs et de la vérité, 1775; ence, under the guise of a dual denary, divine and
De l’Esprit des choses, 1800; Des nombres, 1843), manifested, where creation reflects the triune deity
mathematics — scientific as well as theosophical — and its seven “powers”, symbolized by the first ten
are linked to order and harmony; but, as such, they numbers. But > Franz von Baader (1765-1841)
only represent a combination of signs, a language stands foremost, as he develops in his works
which, left to itself, only describes the outer crust of some remarkable spiritual intuitions about the
reality and is bound to remain superficial, unless decad and the interplay of 3 and 4 within Nature
one endeavors to retrieve its original form and (Fermenta cognitionis, 1822-25; commentaries on
actively expand on it. Like bodies, numbers medi- Martines de Pasqually’s Traité and Saint-Martin’s
ate, as it were, between the visible and the invisible Des nombres). With this eminent thinker and
and are linked, moreover, to the “life-force”, the Christian theosopher, we meet with some of the
productive energy in Nature; this situation enables very last, truly original speculative elaborations on
them (mostly the primary Decad) to express the the dynamics and interactions of life and spirit in
laws and actions of all living beings. The numerical the micro- and macrocosm, reconciled with con-
language is also an aspect of the divine Word and temporary scientific and philosophical perspectives
of its expression(s), present as such on all levels of through the partial agency of numerical analogies.
existence, and which requires an active effort of Seen in this light, Romantic philosophy may also be
combination(s) and interpretation on the theoso- interpreted as an attempt to override a well-known
pher’s part, so as to become a living and truly spir- general tendency of the late 18th and early roth
itual translation of the cosmic order. In other centuries, which is to extend the concepts of (quan-
words, to fulfill their potential as vital intermedi- titative) measure and calculus to most areas of
aries and theosophical signs, numbers must first be knowledge (including ethics, psychology or poli-
“assimilated” by the dynamic process of imagina- tics), and counterbalance it with the dynamics of
tion and then “acted upon”, so to speak, by way of natural sciences, allied to an aesthetic theory of the
certain privileged mathematical operations, thus human perception of signs and qualities.
paving the way to more than a mere “reading” of As for the evolution of number symbolism dur-
the world: to cooperation in its “writing” as well. ing the late-r9th and 2oth centuries, it thoroughly
From ~ Martines de Pasqually (1727-1774) or confirms the obliteration of the worldview inher-
+ Cagliostro (1743-1795) to P. de Joux (1752- ited from the Renaissance, notwithstanding the
1825) and many others, masonic authors have not obstinate persistency of a certain amount of idées
neglected the use of arithmology. In his Traité de la recues associated with it, and their more or less
réintégration des étres, grounded in “kabbalistic” substantial transformation by the growing secular-
and Christian theosophical doctrines, Pasqually ization of modern thought. Obviously, in a universe
develops a complete and somewhat personal which may no longer be perceived as an organic,
exposé of cosmogony, of the Fall of man, and of the animated being, the intellectual plausibility of “liv-
path leading to the recovery of Adam’s spiritual ing” correspondences and world-harmony — not as
prerogatives. These are linked to the number 3, as mere literary metaphors but as actual epistemo-
is also the case with the divine “essences” presiding logic categories — vanishes for the most part. Con-
over the production of forms, which are in turn sequently, numbers can only with the greatest
synthesized by 4, 8 and 10, or the plenary expan- difficulty remain considered as privileged interme-
sion of Unity. Biblical themes (Solomon’s Temple) diaries between the essence and structure of real-
and ritual/theurgic considerations interlace and, ity. Analogy as a valid aspect of causality, and
more often than not, hinge on the symbolic quali- the notion of the “unicity” of Nature, both
ties of numbers and geometrical figures, a topic being reduced to the status of antiquated and
synthesized for instance in P. de Joux’s “Exposition naive views, the capacity hitherto recognised in

--- Page 306 ---
NUMBER SYMBOLISM 882
mathematical entities to figure actual “signs”, 1921) or apply numbers to other, different pur-
henceforth tends to become meaningless; further- poses (> R. Schwaller de Lubic’s Etude sur les
more, an homogeneity of nature between knowl- nombres, 1917 — to natural cycles; D. Néroman
edge and reality being refuted, numbers can no [M. Rougié], La plaine de vérité, 1951 - to >
longer represent “formal causes”, or an “expres- astrology), whereas V. Capparelli (La sapienza di
sion” of things, but necessarily become mere logi- Pitagora, 1940-1944) tries to retrieve the ultimate
cal instruments, limited to quantitative uses. spiritual meaning of ancient pythagorean number
Given this situation, some exponents of our sub- philosophy. Nowadays, works of this kind increas-
ject do not bother to convey much more than trite ingly manifest, it must be noted, an attempt at
topoi (A. M. Fax, Des nombres mystérieux, 1850; somehow integrating all kinds of scientific and his-
A. lEsprit, Histoire des chiffres...au point de torical data, taken from the various academic fields
vue... occulte, 1893), occasionnally festooned of research, including scholarly works on the ori-
with borrowed occultistic views, whereas others gins and development of number symbolism itself
actually publish much more ambitious universal (beginning with the german philological school of
overviews, in which mathematics (including their H. Usener, W.-H. Roscher, FE. Boll, O. Weinreich)!
symbolic side) are naively purported to offer a syn- Both the last two centuries have also witnessed
thetic, “scientific” key to all available knowledge the appearance of a strong academic interest in
(M. Etchegoyen [ft 1843], De l’Unité, 1836-42 “numerical criticism”, i.e. the mathematical struc-
[4 vols.], grounded in ontology and metaphysics; turing of literary texts and poems (from Virgil
> P.-E-G. Lacuria [¢ 1890], Les harmonies de to Hermann Hesse, but mainly about medieval
Etre exprimées par les nombres, 1847 [2 vol.]). documents, with a peak of publications during
A talented attempt at reviving neoplatonic arith- the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s); but, as with the
mology is that of Thomas Taylor (+ 1835; The The- applications of number (and proportions — e.g. the
oretic Arithmetic of the Pythagoreans, 1816, and “Golden Section”) to art in general, music and
reprints), while the Catholic tradition is upheld architecture in particular, or even liturgy, the rela-
(amongst others) by Canon Auber (1804-1892) in tion of these speculations to arithmology proper is
his Histoire et théorie du symbolisme religieux, in fact often problematic (less so, of course, during
1870-72 [4 vol.; reprint 1977]. Masonic and the Middle Ages and Renaissance), enough at least
occultistic compilations live on with Rd. G. Oliver for us to have left them outside the scope of this
(¢ 1875; The Pythagorean Triangle, 1875) or > article.
W.W. Westcott (1848-1925; Numbers: Their
Pitagora, Le Opere e le Testimonianze (ed. M. Gian-
Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, 1890). Apart
giulio), Milan: Oscar Mondadori, 2002 (2 vols.) ¢
from giving birth to the inept “numerology” Philolaos, Fragments, in: C.A. Hufman, Philolaos of
alluded to at the outset of these pages, the 19th Croton, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993
century has also — and more interestingly — fostered ¢ Nicomachus of Gerasa, “Theologoumena arith-
a series of anglo-saxon and german works dealing metice” in: Photius, Bibliothéque (ed. and fr. trans.
with the interpretation of biblical numbers, with R. Henry), vol. 3, Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1962, 40-48
¢ Theon of Smyrna, Mathematics Useful for the Read-
more or less esoteric undertones; the most notable
ing of Plato (D. & R. Lawlor trans.), Wizard’s Book-
representatives of this (still extant) undercurrent,
shelf, San Diego (Cal.), 1979 # Anatolius, On the
which stretches from the mid-1860’s to our time, Decad (R. Waterfield trans.), Alexandria: the Journal
being — besides E.W. Bullinger’s Number in Scrip- of Western Cosmological Traditions 3 (1995), 181-94
ture (1894; sev. reprints) - W. Begley’s Biblia cab- ¢ Iamblichus, I] Numero e il Divino (ed. and ital. trans.
balistica (1903; rep.), T.S. Lea’s and EB. Bond’s FE. Romano), Milan: Rusconi, 1995 [includes the “The-
Gematria (1917, rep.), A.Q. Heller’s Biblische ology of Arithmetic”] ¢ idem, The Theology of Arith-
metic (R. Waterfield trans.), Grand Rapids (Mi):
Zahlensymbolik (1936), and L. Stalnaker’s Mystic
Phanes Press, 1988 ¢ Proclus, Commentary on the
Symbolism in Bible Numerals (1952). First Book of Euclid’s “Elements” (G.R. Morrow
Most of the above trends have continued into trans.), Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1970
the 2oth century, giving birth until our day to a (1992*) ¢ Ambrose of Milan, Epistol@ in: (Migne ed.)
relatively steady flow of publications which, how- Patrologia Latina 16 (976 D, col. 1156) # Augustine,
ever, generally offer but little novelty. Very few De Genesi ad litteram (P. Agaésse & A. Solignac trad.),
contemporary writers dealing with number sym- Paris: Desclée de Brouwer, 1972 (2 vols.), 1, 299 (Bib-
liotheca Augustiniana, 48) # idem, De Quantitate
bolism actually display any originality at all,
anime (W. Hormann, ed.), Vienna: Hoelder-Pichler-
moreover allied to a real consistency of thought; Tempsky, 1986 ¢ T. de Langres, Traité sur le symbol-
they either present “spiritual” overviews of the isme des nombres (ed. & trad. R. Deleflie), Langres:
field (R. Allendy, Le symbolisme des nombres, D. Guéniot, 1978 ¢ J. Peckham, De numeris mysticis

--- Page 307 ---
883 NUYSEMENT
(B. Hugues, ed.), Archivium francescanum histori- liaison... sur la littérature ... du Moyen Age (suppl.
cum 78 (1985), 1-28 & 333-383 ¢ J. Clichtove, to the Cahiers de civilisation médiévale, Poitiers) 8:
De mystica significatione numerorum opusculum, 1-2 (1992) & 9: 1 (1993) # S. Gersh, From lamblichus
Paris: H. Estienne, 1513 # P. Bongo, Numerorum to Eriugena, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1978 # J. Godwin,
Mysteria, Bergamo: C. Ventura, 1599 [reprint Olms, Harmonies of Heaven and Earth, London: Thames
Hildesheim, 1983] @ A. Kircher, Rome: Arithmologia, & Hudson, 1987 « FE. Heinimann, “Mass, Gewicht,
1655 # M. de Pasqually, Traité de la réintégration Zahl”, Museum Helveticum 32 (1975), 183-196 ¢
(ed. R. Amadou), Paris: R. Dumas, 1974 @ L.C. de E. Jauneau, “J. Scot et la métaphysique des nombres”,
Saint-Martin, Des nombres (ed. N. Jacques-Chaquin), in: W. Beierwaltes (ed.), Begriff und Metapher: Sprach-
Nice: Bélisane, 1983 [other version R. Amadou éd., form des Denkens bei Eriugena, Heidelberg: C. Winter,
Paris: Cariscript, 1983] ¢ idem, Theosophic Corre- 1990, 126-141 @ J.F. Mattei, Pythagore et les Pytha-
spondence (1792-1797) (transl. E.B. Penny), Pasadena: goriciens, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1993
Theosophical University Press, 1982 @ P. de Joux, Ce ¢ H. Meyer, Die Zahlenallegorese im Mittelalter:
que c'est que la Franche-Magonnerie, Paris: Cariscript, Methode und Gebrauch, Munich: W. Fink, 1975 ¢
1988 [other reprint C. Lacour, Nimes, 1997]. idem & R. Suntrup, Lexikon der Mittelalterlichen
Zahlenbedeutungen, Munich: W. Fink, 1987 (19997)
Lit.: M.J.B. Allen, Nuptial Arithmetic: M. Ficino’s W. G. Most, “The Scriptural Basis of St Augustine’s
Commentary on the Fatal Number in Book VIII of Arithmology”, The Catholic Biblical Quarterly 13
Plato’s Republic, Berkeley (Cal.): Berkeley University (1951), 284-295 # B. Obrist, Les débuts de l’imagerie
Press, 1994 @ W. Batschelet-Massini, Zur kosmo- alchimique (XIV*-XV¢* siécles), Paris: Le Sycomore,
logischen Arithmetik des Boethius, Basle, 1980 ¢ 1982 @ D.J. O'Meara, Pythagoras revived: Mathemat-
G. Bechtle & D.J. O’Meara (eds.), La philosophie ics and Philosophy in Late Antiquity, London: Oxford
des mathématiques de l’antiquité tardive, Fribourg: University Press, 1989 # F. Sbordone, “U’ebdomadario
Editions Universitaires, 2000 ¢ W. Beierwaltes, di Niceforo Gregora”, Rivista Indo-Greco-Italica 20:
“Augustins Interpretation von Sapientia 11, 21”, 3/4 (1936), 3-20 @ A. Schimmel, The Mystery of
Revue des Etudes Augustiniennes 15 (1969), 51-61 ¢ Numbers, London: Oxford University Press, 1993 ¢
E.T. Bell, Numerology, New York, 1933 (19467) ¢ V. Schultze, Zahl Proportion Analogie: Eine Unter-
A. Bonker-Vallon, Metaphysik und Mathematik bei suchung zur Metaphysik und Wissenschaftshaltung
G. Bruno, Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1995 # L. Bor- der N. von Kues, Munich, 1975 ¢ G. Shaw, Theurgy
chardt, Gegen die Zahlenmystik an der grossen Pyra- and the Soul: The Neoplatonism of lamblichus, PA:
mide bei Gise, Berlin: Behrend, 1922 ¢ J.P. Brach, La University Park, 1995 @ K. Staehle, Die Zahlenmystik
symbolique des nombres, Paris: Presses Universitaires bei Philo von Alexandreia, Leipzig-Berlin: Teubner,
de France, 1994 (rev. and augm. ital. trans. I] sim- 1931 @R. Suntrup, “Zahlenbedeutung in der mittelal-
bolismo dei numeri, Rome: Arkeios, 1999) # idem, terlichen Liturgieallegorese”, Archiv fiir Liturgiewis-
“Deux exemples de symbolisme géométrique dans des senschaft 26 (1984), 321-346 @ R.L. Surles (ed.),
textes alchimiques du XVII* siécle”, in: D. Kahn & Medieval Numerology: A Book of Essays, London-
S. Matton (eds.), Alchimie: art, histoire et mythes, New York: Garland, 1993 ¢ J. Trouillard, “La puis-
Paris-Milan: S.E.H.A.-Arché, 1995, 717-735 # idem, sance secrete du nombre selon Proclos”, Revue de
“Quelques réflexions sur les fondements spéculatifs de Philosophie ancienne 1/2 (1983), 227-241 @ V. Tuesta,
la symbolique des nombres”, in: R. Caron, J. Godwin, “Eficacia del numero segin S. Agustin”, Etudes
W.J. Hanegraaff & J.L. Vieillard-Baron (eds.), Augustiniennes 3 (1968), 81-107 # L. Valcke, “Des
Esotérisme, Gnoses @ Imaginaire symbolique: Conclusiones aux Disputationes: numérologie et
Meélanges offerts a Antoine Faivre, Leuven: Peeters, mathématiques chez J. Pic de la Mirandole”, Laval
2001, 741-747 ¢ W. Burkert, Lore and Science in théologique et philosophique 41:1 (1985), 43-56 ¢
Ancient Pythagoreanism, Cambridge (Ma): Harvard L. Zhmud, Wissenschaft, Philosophie und Religion im
University Press, 1972 ¢ J. Céard, “Bovelles et ses tra- friihen Pythagorismus, Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1997
ditions numérologiques”, in: Charles de Bovelles en ¢ A. Zimmermann (ed.), Mensura: Mass, Zahl,
son cinquieme centenaire (1479-1979), Paris: G. Tré- Zahlensymbolik im Mittelalter, Berlin-New York:
daniel, 1982, 211-28 L. Cilleruelo O.S.A., “Origen W. de Gruyter, 1983-1984 (2 vols.).
del Simbolismo del Numero Siete, en S. Agustin”, La
Ciudad de Dios 165 (1953), 501-511 J.M. Counet, JEAN-PIERRE BRACH
Mathématiques et dialectique chez Nicolas de Cues,
Paris: Vrin, 2000 ¢ J.J. Davis, Biblical Numerology,
Grand Rapids (Mi): Baker Book House, 1968 ¢
A. Delatte, Etudes sur la littérature pythagoricienne, Nuysement, Clovis Hesteau de,
Paris: Champion, 1915 (Genéve: Slatkine, 19747) * between 1555 and 1560 place
U. Ernst, “Kontinuitat und Transformation der Mitte- unknown, t after 1624 place unknown
lalterlichen Zahlensymbolik in der Renaissance”,
Euphorion 77 (1983), 247-325 A. Faivre, Eckart- Secretary of the chamber of Henri III (1551-
shausen et la théosophie chrétienne, Paris: Klinck-
1589) and of the Duke of Anjou (1555-1584),
sieck, 1969 # L. Ferrero, Storia del Pitagorismo nel
mondo romano, Turin: Turin University Press, 1955 disciple of Jean Dorat (1508-1588) and member
P. Gallais (ed.), “Les nombres”, PRISMA: Bulletin de of the Academy founded by Antoine de Baif

--- Page 308 ---
NUYSEMENT 884
(1532-1589), Nuysement is first of all a perfect faire les Incredules & ennemis de cest Art, Paris:
courtly poet of the end of the 16th century. His J. Périer & A. Buisard, 1620 ¢ Traittez du vray sel secret
des philosophes et de l’esprit general du monde, con-(Euvres poétiques (1578), which essentially consist
tenant en son interieur les trois principes naturels, Paris:
of love poetry, earned him some notoriety at that
Jérémie Périer & Abdias Buizard, 1620 ¢ “Poeme
time. But as W. Kirsop has shown, emphasizing the Philosophic sur l’Azoth des Philosophes”, in: (pseudo)
court of Valois’ sympathy for spagyric doctors and Basile Valentin, Azoth ou le moyen de faire lor caché
devotees of > Paracelsus, Nuysement soon seems des Philosophes, Paris: J. & C. Périer, 1624 @ Les
to have developed a solid knowledge in the domain visions hermétiques et autres poemes alchimiques
of alchemy as well. Several decisive encounters led suivis des Traitez du vray sel secret des philosophes et
de l’esprit général du monde (S. Matton, ed.), Paris:
him, according to his own statements, on the ardu-
Retz, 1974 Les oeuvres poétiques (R. Guillot, ed.),
ous path of the quest for the philosopher’s stone.
3 vols., Geneva: Droz, 1993 & 1996.
First there was his meeting with Francois de Foix,
count of Candale [> Foix-Candale], who initiated Lit.: H. Blemont, “Nuysement”, in: Dictionnaire de
him into the Hermetic doctrine. Then there was his biographie francaise, Paris: Letouzey, 1933-1995, vol.
meeting with the famous adept Sendigovius (1566- 17, col. 1168-1169 @ F. Greiner, Les métamorphoses
1636), whom he mentions several times in his d’Hermes: Tradition alchimique et esthétique littéraire
works. After a long literary eclipse, and while dans la France de l’age baroque (1583-1646), Paris:
exercising as a protégé of the duke of Lorraine Honoré Champion, 2000, 410-426 and 428-438 ¢
W. Kirsop, Clovis Hesteau, sieur de Nuysement, et la
the function of collector general for the county of
littérature alchimique a la fin du XVI° et au début du
Ligny-en-Barrois, Nuysement once again took up XVII® siecle (unpublished thesis: bibliothéque de la
the pen, this time to put his talents as a writer in the Sorbonne, 1960) « V.L. Saulnier, “Nuysement”, in:
service of alchemy. The result was, successively, Dictionnaire des lettres francaises, X VI° siécle, Paris:
a Traittez du vray sel (1620), a Poéme philosophic Arthéme Fayard, 1951, 377 ¢ A.M. Schmidt, La poésie
de la vérité de la phisique minerale, followed by scientifique en France au X VI’ siécle (1938), Lausanne:
repr. Rencontre, 1970, 410-433.Stances and Visions (1620), and finally a Poéme
sur l Azoth des philosophes (1624). These various
works are marked by a syncretic philosophy: FRANK GREINER
Nuysement quotes Plato and > Hermes Trismegis-
tus as authorities while subscribing to Aristotelian Occult/Occultism
ideas (the theory of the four elements, matter and
form, generation) or stoic ones (the role of the spirit 1. OCCULT QUALITIES 2. OCCULT FORCES
or the pneuma). Nuysement’s work is also marked 3. OCCULT PHILOSOPHY 4. OCCULT
by the influence of Paracelsus (he notably takes up SCIENCES 5. OCCULTISM 6. THE OCCULT
his doctrine of the three principles, while insisting
on the importance of salt, and develops a primarily Although the various terms and expressions
medical concept of alchemy). Finally, constantly based upon the latin “occultus” (“hidden, secret”,
blending references to Holy Scripture with her- from occulere, “to cover over, hide, conceal”) tend
metic arcana, his attempt is to make his art into to be used indiscriminately and are often con-
an instrument in the service of God’s glory. This fused in common parlance, they are the reflection
boldness would earn him the wrath of Marin of a historical development in the various stages
Mersenne (1588-1648) who, in La Vérité des sci- of which they refer to different things. It is of
ences (1625), ironically surnamed him “Nui- particular importance to distinguish between the
sance”. These polemics do refer us to one of the original adjective “occult”, and the substantive
main motivations of this alchemical writer. In “occultism” that made its first appearance in the
an era when Paracelsianism was in open struggle r9th century.
with official science, Nuysement, as his Poéme
philosophic shows explicitly, intended to provide Iie CEULTIOUARIELES
the Hermetic art with a defense and illustration In the context of the medieval reception of Aris-
that should definitively reduce its enemies to totelian natural philosophy, a distinction was made
silence. A few years later this would also be the between the manifest, directly observable quali-
ambition of Pierre-Jean Fabre (1588-1658) in his ties of things (such as colors or tastes), and their
Propugnaculum alchemiae (1645). occult qualities, which were not directly observ-
able and could not be accounted for in terms of
Poéme Philosophic de la Vérité de la Phisique the four elementary qualities. Important exam-
Minéralle, Ou sont refutées les obiections que peuvent ples were the force of magnetism, the influences

--- Page 309 ---
885 OCCULT/OCCULTISM
emanating from the stars, and the curative vir- occult and so-called manifest qualities could both
tues of herbal, animal and mineral substances. be explained scientifically in terms of an insensible
Although their effects could be observed in nature mechanism. In fact, since our sense perceptions
and found out by experimental means, occult qual- never give us a direct picture of reality, a// qualities
ities could not be understood or explained accord- were “occult”; but this did not imply, as for the
ing to the canons of logic and natural philosophy. scholastics, that they were unknowable. The ambi-
For this reason they could not be objects of sci- tion of the new science was, precisely, not to restrict
entific knowledge as understood from a scholastic itself to the domain of what could be perceived by
medieval perspective; their activity could be known the senses, but to go deeper and explore the invisi-
indirectly, but not investigated directly. ble workings of nature. In this respect there is a
In his pharmacological writings, Galen (2nd cent.) continuity between the magia naturalis of Renais-
wrote that many substances (medical drugs, poisons, sance philosophers and the new science of the 17th
> amulets etc.) worked by virtue of ‘undescribable century: although the former remained depen-
properties’, of which no systematic account could be dent on scholastic categories while the latter went
given and whose manner of working was unknown. beyond them, both refused to leave occult qualities
Medieval thinkers, including Thomas Aquinas (De in the domain of inscrutable and irrational myster-
occultis operibus naturae, written between 1269- ies and instead approached them as a domain of
1272), came to understand them in terms of Aristo- reality that could be scrutinized by the human mind
tle’s doctrine of form: the occult qualities or virtues and put to practical use.
of things were based upon their “specific” or “sub- Pejorative statements since the 17th century
stantial form”. The latter was imperceptible to the about the occult qualities as ‘that ill-contrived
senses and could not be reduced to the qualities of sanctuary of ignorance’ or ‘that infatuating opium
the elements or their combination. of ignote qualities’ (Walter Charleton) were actu-
In their discussions of occult qualities, the ally directed not against the reality of occult quali-
great representatives of Renaissance > neoplaton- ties as such but against the scholastics, who were
ism and hermetism [> Hermetic Literature III] blamed for using the doctrine as an intellectual
remained dependent on scholastic categories. refuge that blocked inquiry instead of stimulating it
Thus, in describing how certain stones can attract (Hutchison 1982, 245). Eventually, however, the
celestial influences, > Marsilio Ficino emphasizes subtleties of the debate were forgotten and any
their “occult properties”, which are ‘hidden from belief in occult qualities came to be perceived as
our senses, and hence only with difficulty known to incompatible with science. Nevertheless, even in
our reason’; and he points out that ‘a material Diderot & d’Alembert’s Encyclopédie the lemma
power requires much matter if it is to achieve “occulte” still carefully distinguishes between
much; but a formal power even with a minimum of “occult sciences” and “occult qualities”; whereas
matter avails very much’ (De Vita III, ch. 12). Like- the former are simply rejected as vain and supersti-
wise > Cornelius Agrippa describes the occult tious, about the latter we read that if the ancient
virtues as ‘a sequel of the species and form of this philosophers understood by an occult quality ‘a
or that thing’ and points out that they have much cause whose nature and manner of acting is
greater efficacy than elementary qualities precisely unknown, one must admit that their philosophy is,
because they ‘have much form and little matter’. in several respects, more sane than ours’ (emphasis
He explains that they ‘are called occult properties in original).
because their causes lie hidden, so that man’s intel-
lect cannot in any way reach and find them out; 2000 GOULTAPORECES
wherefore philosophers have attained to the great- But while the kinds of phenomena traditionally
est part of them by long experience rather than by referred to as occult qualities were increasingly
the search of reason’ (De occ. phil. I: 10). demystified in so far as they could be assimilated
The new philosophies associated with the “sci- into “normal science”, their traditional under-
entific revolution” of the 17th century have often standing as mysterious and perhaps even divine
been portrayed as rejecting occult qualities; it is forces lived on as well. From the 18th century on,
more accurate, however, to say that they accepted those who rejected the hegemonic claims of
their reality but sought to account for them in Enlightenment ideologies increasingly focused
mechanical terms (Hutchison 1982). Whereas the on such “occult forces” in their efforts to prove
scholastic approach implied that occult qualities the limitations of the mechanicist and materialist
fell beyond the scope of science, philosophers and science. Moreover, in reaction against the per-
scientists in the wake of Descartes claimed that ceived threat of “fragmentation” (implied by a

--- Page 310 ---
OCCULT/OCCULTISM 886
mechanicist worldview), it was increasingly powers in man” referred primarily to the miracu-
claimed that there is ultimately only one such force, lous human abilities demonstrated by animal mag-
which permeates the world the way an organism is netism and its follow-ups, hypnosis, > spiritualism
permeated by an invisible life force. Major candi- and psychical research, all of which were originally
dates for this occult force from the 18th century on explained with reference to the universal occult
are “electricity” and “magnetism” [> animal mag- force of magnetism or its many cognates (although
netism], and these were discussed in terms of theo- eventually psychological explanations tended to
retical frameworks directly rooted in Renaissance take over). The core idea was and remained
magia naturalis. Theories of magnetism and of that occult forces in man and nature cannot be
electricity (as well as these very terms) were largely explained by mainstream materialist science, and
interchangeable — the founder of animal magnet- therefore furnish empirical proof that the latter
ism Franz Anton Mesmer hesitated which term to should be replaced by a more comprehensive
use for the invisible fluid postulated by his theory — worldview or “occult philosophy”.
and had their Renaissance origins in the work
of Rudolf Goclenius the younger (1572-1621) and 3 OCGUL IMP HlM OS: OrPEy
~> Athanasius Kircher (1602-1680). Goclenius dis- The notion of an “occult philosophy”, as distinct
cussed magnetism as a manifestation of the univer- from qualitas occulta, seems to have originated in
sal forces of sympathy and antipathy; he wrote 1510 with > Agrippa’s first draft of De occulta
that magia naturalis consists in the investigation philosophia (followed by the publication in 1531
of ‘these abstruse properties and forces, deeply of book one, and of the complete version in three
hidden in the majesty of Nature’, and presented books in 1533). From his dedicatory letter to >
the entire universe as a living organism. Kircher in Trithemius and his Ad lectorem, it is clear that for
his Magnes sive de arte magnetica opus tripartium Agrippa the term was synonymous with “magic”:
(1643) associated magnetism with the presence of he called his book “de occulta philosophia” merely
God himself as an ‘all-pervasive, radiant power, because he hoped that title would be less offensive.
which gives life, forms and sustains everything’. But magic, for Agrippa, stood for the sublime
On such foundations, a complete “theology of elec- religious philosophy of the Ancients, the prisca the-
tricity” was later developed by Swabian pietists, ologia [> Tradition] which had fallen into disre-
notably > Friedrich Christoph Oetinger, Prokop pute and now needed to be restored. Such a close
Divisch (1696-1765) and Johann Ludwig Fricker association between magic and prisca theologia
(1729-1766). was quite logical: > Zoroaster was considered not
Theories along these lines were continued by eso- only the chief of the ancient Persian magi, but was
teric thinkers throughout the roth century and also believed to have authored the Chaldaean Ora-
beyond, and easily assimilated other but appar- cles and was mentioned by Ficino as the very first
ently related concepts, such as “ether” or the of the ancient sages, earlier even than > Hermes
“Od”-force of Karl von Reichenbach (1788-1869). Trismegistus. The prisca theologia therefore had to
Such attempts at syncretizing various theories be equivalent with a prisca magia, exemplified by
about a universal occult force found their culmina- the theurgy of the Chaldaean Oracles; and even
tion in > H.P. Blavatsky’s “Fohat”, described in more so, given the adoration of the Christ child by
her characteristic style as the ‘occult, electric, vital the “magi”, as found in the gospel.
power’, ‘the personified electric vital power, the Characterized by Will-Erich Peuckert as ‘a neo-
transcendental binding Unity of all Cosmic Ener- platonic credo’ (Pansophie, 114), Agrippa’s De
gies, on the unseen as on the manifested planes’, occulta philosophia discusses in detail the elemen-
and ‘the Solar Energy, the electric vital fluid . . . the tary, celestial, and intellectual worlds, through the
animal soul of Nature, so to say, or — Electricity’ various levels of which man may “rise up” towards
(The Secret Doctrine 1, 109-112). The original pro- the divine as well as “draw down” superior forces.
gram of Blavatsky’s — Theosophical Society In this context Agrippa discusses the various arts
mentioned as its fourth objective “To oppose and practices of natural > magic, > number sym-
materialism and theological dogmatism in every bolism, > astrology, and (Christian) kabbalah [>
possible way, by demonstrating the existence of Jewish Influences], the latter pertaining to e.g. the-
occult forces unknown to science, in nature, and ories about spirits, angels and demons, prophecy
the presence of psychic and spiritual powers in and religious practice. The term “occult philoso-
man’; this objective was later reformulated as “To phy” therefore stands for the entirety of the “occult
investigate unexplained laws of Nature and the sciences” (see below), provided that these are
powers latent in man’. The “psychic and spiritual understood not only as practical disciplines but as

--- Page 311 ---
887 OCCULT/OCCULTISM
integral parts of a comprehensive religious philos- the term “occult sciences” an appropriate one. But
ophy and cosmology on neoplatonic, hermetic similar to what happened to the notion of an occult
and kabbalistic foundations. This sublime philo- philosophy, and for very much the same reasons,
sophy/cosmology was obviously understood as the notion of “occult sciences” became ideologi-
eminently compatible with the Christian faith. cally charged since the Enlightenment; in the
In later periods, the meaning of the term has not wake of what happened to the notion of “occult
fundamentally changed: adherents as well as critics qualities” (see above), and in a context that insisted
have used it to indicate a perspective that sees the on science as a public and demonstrable rather
“occult sciences” not only as practical disciplines than secret and mysterious knowledge, the very
but as essential parts of a comprehensive religious notion of “science” came to be seen as incompati-
philosophy. Since the Enlightenment in particular, ble ex principio with anything called “occult”. As
any such reference to an “occult philosophy” is a result, any usage of the term “occult science(s)”
loaded with ideological import: modern Theoso- henceforth implied a conscious and intentional
phists and occultists use it to characterize their own polemic against mainstream or establishment sci-
worldview in opposition to materialism, positivism ence. Such polemics are typical of occultism in all
and dogmatic Christianity, whereas for critics it is its forms.
roughly synonymous with a worldview based upon
pre-scientific and irrationalist error and supersti- Se OlGC Une TnSsiM
tion. Since both sides in this debate claim their own The substantive “occultism” (l’occultisme)
philosophy to be “scientific”, it is not surprising seems to have appeared for the first time in Jean-
that, again since the 18th century, the term “occult Baptiste Richard de Randonvilliers’ Dictionnaire
science” (in the singular) is often used in exactly the des mots nouveaux (1842), in an article by A. de
same sense as “occult philosophy”. Such usage Lestrange about “Esotérisme chrétien”. It was used
must be distinguished from the term “occult sci- by > Eliphas Lévi in the “Discours préliminaire” of
ences” in the plural. his Dogme et rituel de la haute magie (1856), and
from there was picked up by many later authors. It
A OMGU Til, SiG TENG ES seems to have been introduced in the English-
The notion of “occult sciences” seems to have speaking world by > H.P. Blavatsky in 1875 (“A
originated in the 16th century, around the same Few Questions to ‘Hiraf’”, Spiritual Scientist, 15
time as that of “occult philosophy” (Secret 1988, & 22 July 1875, 217). Mainly in older studies, the
7). Usually three main occult sciences are distin- term has sometimes been used quite generally as a
guished, i.e. astrology, > alchemy and (natural) synonym of > esotericism (for example by Robert
magic; but the list can be expanded by seeing e.g. Amadou, L’occultisme [1950/1980]), or more
the various > divinatory arts as a separate category specifically as equivalent with the occult sci-
instead of subsuming them under that of magic. ences (see for a prominent example Copenhaver,
Although these various “sciences” have mutually Symphorien Champier and the Reception of the
influenced one another in various ways and there Occultist Tradition in Renaissance France, 1978).
are clear areas of overlap (such as e.g. astral magic), The latter approach has also been defended for
they have distinct histories and it was not unusual some time by Antoine Faivre, who described the
for practitioners of one occult science to reject occult sciences as the practical dimension of
another one as false. The idea of a “unity of the esotericism and referred to them as “occultism”
occult sciences”, suggested by influential scholars (1994, 33-35). In this he seems to have followed the
such as Keith Thomas and Brian Vickers, is there- sociologist Edward Tiryakian, who distinguished
fore hard to uphold (Newman & Grafton 2001); between occultism as consisting of certain prac-
most probably it reflects a failure to distinguish tices, techniques or procedures, and esotericism
between occult sciences on the one hand and the as the religious/philosophical belief systems on
synthesizing Renaissance project of an occult phi- which such practices are based; a distinction that
losophy on the other. has been rejected as ‘nonexistent’ by Robert Gal-
It is nevertheless easy to understand why astrol- breath (Tiryakian 1974, 265; Galbreath 1983, 17-
ogy, alchemy and natural magic were grouped 18), and was later dropped by Faivre as well (1998,
together under a common umbrella. Each one of 8). A different type of distinction between esoteri-
them engaged in systematic investigation of nature cism and occultism derives from the works of >
and natural processes, in the context of theoretical René Guénon, who opposed his own concept of an
frameworks that relied heavily on a belief in occult esoteric metaphysics, to be found at the core of the
qualities, virtues or forces; this combination makes exoteric religions, against occultism, understood as

--- Page 312 ---
OCCULT/OCCULTISM 888
a quasi-materialist perversion exemplified by e.g. spirits or fairies to parapsychological experiments,
+ spiritualism, the doctrines of the > Theosophi- from UFO-abductions to Oriental mysticism, from
cal Society and the many secret societies of his vampire legends to channeling, and so on. In this
day. Such distinctions, which have been adopted sense, “the occult” can actually be defined as
by many later authors (see e.g. Serge Hutin, Luc ‘rejected knowledge’ (Webb 1974, 191). Under-
Benoist), are obviously based on Guénon’s own stood as such, it refers to a field that includes
Traditionalist convictions [> Tradition], and occultism but is much broader than that field
cannot be accepted as scholarly valid; but his according to any of the definitions discussed ear-
observation that “occultism” in his sense is deeply lier; and it must not be confused with Western eso-
influenced by roth-century materialism is correct tericism as understood in modern academic usage.
and relevant, as will be seen.
In current scholarly usage, in fact, the term Lit.: Ernst Benz, Theologie der Elektrizitat: Zur Begeg-
nung und Auseinandersetzung von Theologie und
occultism tends to be used as referring specifically
Naturwissenschaft im 17. un 18. Jahrhundert, Wies-
to r9th-century developments within the general baden: Franz Steiner, 1971 ¢ PR. Blum, “Qualitas
history of Western esotericism, as well as their deri- Occulta”, in: Joachim Ritter & Karlfried Grinder
vations through the 2oth century. In a first, purely (eds.), Historisches Worterbuch der Philosophie, vol. 7,
descriptive sense, it is used as referring to the Darmstadt, 1989, 1743-1748 ¢ William Eamon, Sci-
specifically French currents in the wake of Eliphas ence and the Secrets of Nature: Books of Secrets in
Lévi, flourishing in the “neo-martinist” context of Medieval and Early Modern Culture, Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1994, 210-217, 291-300
~ Papus and related manifestations of fin-de-siecle
¢ Antoine Faivre, Access to Western Esotericism,
esotericism. In a second, analytic and typological Albany: SUNY Press, 1994, 33-35 @ idem, “Questions
sense, it can be seen as referring not only to these of Terminology Proper to Study of Esoteric Currents
currents as such, but to the type of esotericism that in Modern and Contemporary Europe”, in: Antoine
they represent, and that is also characteristic of Faivre & Wouter J. Hanegraaff (eds.), Western Esoteri-
most other esoteric currents from ca. the mid- cism and the Science of Religion, Louvain: Peeters
1998, 1-10 ¢ idem, Philosophie de la Nature: Physique19th century on (such as e.g. spiritualism, modern
sacrée et théosophie X VIII°-X1X° siécle, Paris: Albin
Theosophy, or new magical currents in the lineage
Michel, 1996 # Robert Galbreath, “Explaining Mod-
of the > Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, ern Occultism”, in: Howard Kerr & Charles L. Crow
up to and including such recent developments as (eds.), The Occult in America: New Historical Per-
the ~ New Age movement). From such a perspec- spectives, Urbana & Chicago: University of Illinois
tive, occultism has been defined as comprising ‘all Press, 1983, 11-37 # Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke, “The
attempts by esotericists to come to terms with a Esoteric Uses of Electricity: Theologies of Electricity
disenchanted world or, alternatively, by people in from Swabian Pietism to Ariosophy”, Aries 4:1 (2004),
69-90 # Wouter J. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and
general to make sense of esotericism from the
Western Culture: Esotericism in the Mirror of Secular
perspective of a disenchanted world’ (Hanegraaft Thought, Leiden etc./Albany: E.J. Brill/SUNY Press,
1996/1998, 422). Occultism in this sense has its 1996/1998, 411-442 ¢@ idem, “The Study of Western
pioneers in 18th-century authors such as, notably, Esotericism: New Approaches to Christian and Secular
> Emanuel Swedenborg and Franz Anton Mesmer, Culture”, in: Peter Antes, Armin W. Geertz & Randi
and covers the great majority of esoteric currents Warne (eds.), New Approaches to the Study of Religion
(Religion and Reason), Berlin & New York: De
from at least the mid-rg9th century on.
Gruyter, 2004 ¢ John Henry, “Occult Qualities and the
Experimental Philosophy: Active Principles in Pre-
Clue Oocunt Newtonian Matter Theory”, History of Science 24
Mention should be made, finally, of the term (1986), 335-381 @ Keith Hutchison, “What happened
“occult” used as a substantivized adjective. Colin to Occult Qualities in the Scientific Revolution?”,
Wilson’s 1971 bestseller The Occult is undoubt- Isis 73 (1982), 233-253 ¢ Jean-Pierre Laurant,
edly a major influence on the popular currency of Lésotérisme chrétien en France au XIX® siécle,
Lausanne: LAge d’Homme, 1992, 19-48 ¢ idem,
this usage, particularly among sociologists and
L’ésotérisme, Paris: Les Editions du Cerf, 1993, x 5-65
journalists. It may well be seen as the example par ¢ Joseph Bernard McAllister, The Letter of Saint
excellence of how a variety of currents and phe- Thomas Aquinas De Occultis Operibus Naturae Ad
nomena that do not seem to fit the categories of Quemdam Militem Ultramontanum, Washington
“science” and “religion” are therefore lumped D.C.: The Catholic University of American Press,
together in what is best described as an intellectual 1939 # Ron Millen, “The Manifestation of Occult
Qualities in the Scientific Revolution”, in: Margaret J.waste-basket filled with left-overs (Hanegraaff
Osler & Paul Lawrence Farber (eds.), Religion, Sci-
2004): the popular category of “the occult” seems
ence, and Worldview: Essays in Honor of Richard S.
to contain everything that partakes of “the Westfall, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
charisma of the unexplained”, from the belief in 1995, 185-216 William R. Newman & Anthony

--- Page 313 ---
889 OETINGER
Grafton, “Introduction: The Problematic Status of gregation complained about his “abstruse” ser-
Astrology and Alchemy in Premodern Europe”, in: mons; a sexton circulated a false rumour to the
William R. Newman & Anthony Grafton (eds.),
effect that the piano teacher of Oetinger’s daughter
Secrets of Nature: Astrology and Alchemy in Early
had gotten both this daughter and Oe¢etinger’s
Modern Europe, Cambridge Mass. & London: The
MIT Press, 2001, 1-37 @ Francois Secret, “Du ‘De wife pregnant. In 1759 Oetinger transferred in
Occulta Philosophia’ a Poccultisme du XIX®™ siécle” the office of superintendent to Herrenberg, near
(orig. 1973), Charis: Archives de l’Unicorne t (1988), Tubingen. In 1765 he was named ducal councillor,
5-30 @ Edward A. Tiryakian, “Toward the Sociology prelate, and abbot in Murrhardt, and took over
of Esoteric Culture”, in: Tiryakian (ed.), On the Mar- his duties there in 1766. Duke Carl II Eugen of
gin of the Visible: Sociology, the Esoteric, and the
Wiirttemberg, who planned to establish a salt-
Occult, New York etc. 1974 ¢ James Webb, The
works near Murrhardt, had appointed Oetinger Occult Underground, La Salle: Open Court, 1974 ¢
Frances A. Yates, The Occult Philosophy in the to this office because of his knowledge of chemistry.
Elizabethan Age (1979), London: Routledge & Kegan In 1766-1767 Oéetinger’s book on Swedenborg
Paul, 1983. was confiscated at the behest of the Duke’s Consis-
tory, and in 1767 his publications were placed
WOUTER J. HANEGRAAFF under the control of the censor — both within and
without the borders of the Duchy of Wirttemberg.
Oetinger, Friedrich Christoph Oetinger henceforth evaded this measure by pub-
(pseudonyms: Halatophilus Irenaeus, lishing his works anonymously or under other
Bibliophilus Irenaeus), *2[?].5.1702 names, by suppressing the name of the printer, or
Goppingen, ¢ 10.2.1782 Murrhardt by having his works printed outside Wirttemberg
(e.g. in the free Imperial cities Schwabisch Hall
1. LIFE 2. INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT and Heilbronn), partly withholding the name of
AND MAIN WRITINGS 3. OETINGER’S the printer here as well. In 1772/1773 Oetinger was
MaTuRE THEOSOPHY governor of the silver mine “Unverhofftes Gliick”
at Wistenrot, near Murrhardt. This enterprise
Peet E E failed because he was deceived by the fraudulent
From 1717 to 1720 Oetinger was a pupil at the machinations of the mining counsellor, Gottlieb
Monastery School in Blaubeuren, where he came Riedel, from Saxony. Towards the middle of 1776
into contact with August Hermann Francke (1663- Oetinger, who sympathized with the Freemasons
1727), who visited the town in 1717. He then [> Freemasonry] as well as with the later Rosicru-
transferred to the Monastery School in Beben- cians [> Rosicrucianism] (he was particularly
hausen, near Tiibingen (1720-1722). At the Uni- venerated by those in Amsterdam and by the group
versity of Tubingen, he was a scholarship student around > Nikolay Ivanovich Novikov [1744-
at the “Stift” (Theological Seminary). Here, he first 1818] in Moscow), travelled to Nuremberg to visit
studied liberal arts from 1722 until completing the a group of presumably Rosicrucian-oriented Chris-
requirements for the master’s degree in 1725, after tians. On April 19, 1778, he gave his last sermon;
which he studied theology until 1727. After the but he remained in office, assisted by his son, the
completion of his studies, Oetinger first attended to Vicar Johann Friedrich Oetinger, until his death.
the education of his brothers Wilhelm Ludwig,
Johann Christoph und Ferdinand Christoph. Dur- 2. INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT
ing the period from September 1729 to June 1737 AND MAIN WRITINGS
he undertook a series of journeys in order to Already as a child Oetinger had evinced a pro-
broaden his intellectual horizons, interrupted by nounced religious sensibility. According to his
employment in Tubingen: he was a tutor (“Repe- autobiography, at night he often had extremely
tent”) at the Stift from 1731-1733 and 1737-1738, disturbing dreams concerning the dungeons of
having been given leave from this office in the the unfortunate after their deaths, and his interest
interim. In 1738 he received his first appoint- in the spiritual was thus awakened early in life.
ment as a pastor in Hirsau, and on April 22 of the While at school in Blaubeuren, one of his teachers
same year married Christiane Dorothea née Lin- was Philipp Heinrich Weissensee (1613-1767), a
senmann (1717-1796). In 1743 he became Pastor ‘deeply mystical theologian’. In Bebenhausen he
in Schnaitheim. In 1746 he transferred to Wald- was influenced by the preceptor Israel Gottlieb
dorf, near Tiibingen. In 1752 he was promoted to Canz (1690-1753), an adherent of the Enlighten-
the office of superintendent (dean) in Weinsberg, ment philosopher Christian Wolff (1679-1754). It
near Heilbronn on the Neckar. This was to be an was during this period that Oetinger also became
extremely tumultuous period in his life: the con- acquainted with the thought of Die Inspirierte (the

--- Page 314 ---
OETINGER 890
Inspired), the followers of Johann Friedrich Rock August Gottlieb Spangenberg (1704-1792). As a
(1678-1749) from Oberwalden, near Goppingen. lecturer (magister legens) at the University of Halle
During his studies in Tubingen, influenced by the an der Saale, in whose theological Faculty he had
professor of philosophy Georg Bernhard Bilfinger matriculated on October 24, 1729, he met Gotthilf
(1693-1754), he was originally an adherent of August Francke (1696-1769), the son of the previ-
Leibniz (1646-1716), whose monadology he had ously mentioned theologian A.H. Francke. In
encountered quite early in his studies, and of Chris- Halle, Oetinger furthered his knowledge of Jewish
tian Wolff, but around 1725 a powder maker in mysticism through instruction received from a Jew-
Tubingen, Johann Caspar Obenberger (1673- ish kabbalistic scholar, primarily in the Kabbalah
1744), encouraged him to study the writings of of Isaac Luria (1534-1572) of Safed in Galilee. For
+ Jacob Boehme. He also studied rabbinical his studies, he procured a valuable manuscript of
scholars and the Church Fathers. Of the latter, he the work Etz chayyim (The Tree of Life) by Luria’s
particularly respected (Pseudo-)Macarius and > disciple Chayyim Vital (1543-1620). In 1730, in
Augustine (354-430), whose treatise De spiritu et Herrnhut, he made the acquaintance of Nikolaus
littera he especially valued. Ludwig Count of Zinzendorf (1700-1760), who,
The study of school philosophy, the kabbalah [> to be sure, was also interested in esoterica, but
Jewish Influences] and Boehme increasingly led the not in Oetinger’s interpretation of the totality of
theologian Oetinger toward what was to become the Bible, including the Old Testament. Under
his major philosophical project: the attempt to rec- the influence of the more conservative exegete
oncile epistemology and theology with a sacred Johann Albrecht Bengel (1687-1752), with whom
philosophy (philosophia sacra). In the autumn of Oetinger had corresponded since 1727, Oetinger
the year 1727, after having passed the Konsistori- later (1736/37) rejected Zinzendorf’s idiosyn-
alexamen, Oetinger left the Stift as a Candidatus crasies (criticism and “atomizing” analysis of the
ministerii and took up private lodgings in the town Bibel, onesided Christ-orientation). In Herrnhut,
of Tubingen. In 1728 he was a frequent visitor at Oetinger wrote his work Aufmunternde Griinde
the home of the alchemist Johann Friedrich Metz, zu Lesung der Schrifften Jacob Boehmens [An
Sr., whom he even lent money. Metz’s son, Johann Exhortation to the Perusal of the Works of Jacob
Friedrich Metz, Jr. (1721-1782), was a medical Boehme] (1731), which also contained texts by the
doctor; he established his practice in Frankfurt am Silesian lawyer and Boehme-supporter Hans Diet-
Main in 1765, and in 1768 was the personal physi- rich von Tschesch (1595-1649). Here already,
cian of the young > Goethe. Oetinger’s acceptance of the doctrines of Jacob
Three journeys were of importance for Oetin- Boehme and > Isaac Newton, as well as of the kab-
ger’s further intellectual development. In the course balah (primarily in the version according to Luria)
of the first (1729-1730), he met in Frankfurt am becomes apparent. As opposed to Leibniz’s doc-
Main with Maria Katharina Schutz (1687-1740), trine of independent monads, which excludes an
the spinster daughter of the separatist lawyer interaction between body and soul, Oetinger
Johann Jakob Schiitz (1640-1690). In 1670 this emphasizes the relatedness, the “oneness” of all
relative of > Johann Valentin Andreae (1586- things. Like Boehme, Oetinger is of the opinion
1654) had founded, together with Philipp Jacob that all spiritual entities also possess bodies and
Spener (1635-1705), the Collegium pietatis in “figures”. In opposition to static knowledge,
Frankfurt. Miss Schiitz presented Oetinger with a Oetinger emphasizes dynamic, or “living knowl-
copy of the Kabbala denudata by > Christian edge”. He derived his bipolar chain of reasoning
Knorr von Rosenroth (1636-1689), who had been from Boehme and Newton; but wishing to see in
a friend of her father. This volume contained, Boehme an original prophet, he refused to recog-
among other things, excerpts from the Zohar, and nize that the cobbler from Gorlitz had also been
had as its purpose a Christian interpretation of the influenced by Paracelsus and the kabbalah.
kabbalah. While in Frankfurt, Oetinger also met During his tenure as a tutor at the Stift, Oetinger
with the Jewish kabbalistic scholar Koppel Hecht completed two more books. In these works he
(t 1729), who called his attention to the similarities elaborated on suggestions which he had received
between the teachings of Jacob Boehme and parts from his uncle, Elias Camerer (1672-1734), a pro-
of the kabbalah. In Berleburg and in Schwarzenau fessor of medicine in Tubingen who also had an
respectively, Oetinger met with the mystical spiri- interest in mysticism. According to Oetinger, this
tualists Johann Conrad Dippel (1673-1734) and uncle possessed the gift of Zentralerkenntnis (Cen-
Charles-Hector de Saint-Georges de Marsay (1688- tral Recognition), the direct comprehension of
1753), and in Jena with the Moravian Brother a totality. The high veneration in which the

--- Page 315 ---
891 OETINGER
young Oetinger held Roman Catholic mysticism Fonti” (also “Marquis de Fonti de St. Germain”),
is evidenced by his interest for the Carmelite obviously the famous adventurer the -* Count of
Marie de Sainte-Thérése (also known as Marie de Saint Germain, who had made a name for himself
la Rose, 1640-1717); his work Die Verklarung Jesu as an alchemist.
(The Transfiguration of Jesus; 1734) contains Also in Walddorf he wrote his Imquisitio in sen-
excerpts from two books by Charles abbé de sum communem et rationem (1752), which con-
Brion (1647-1728): her biography La vie de la tains in an appendix an essay on musical theory by
trés-sublime contemplative sceur Marie... (Paris Oetinger’s younger friend, Johann Ludwig Fricker
1720), and his edition of her letters: Lettres spiri- (1729-1766). A version in German for laymen
tuelles (2 vols., Paris 1720). As a counterpart to appeared during Oetinger’s term of office in Weins-
the above-mentioned work, but this time from berg as Die Warheit des Sensus Communis (17 53-
the perspective of Protestant mysticism, Oetinger 1754). These two books emphasize the importance
published his Abrif: Der Evangelischen Ordnung of the Sensus communis — prerational (intuitive)
zur Wiedergeburt (1735), which he had contem- common sense or practical judgement in the quest
plated since 1725 and committed to paper in 1733. for ultimate truth — primarily in the rediscovery
Oetinger’s second journey (1733-1735) again of forgotten troves of wisdom in the ideas of
took him to Herrnhut (1733/34), and over Leiden the Ancients. Christoph Martin Wieland was so
to Amsterdam; the third (1735-1737) to Halle impressed by he Inquisitio that he expressly men-
(1736) and to Homburg vor der Hohe (1737), tioned ‘the Abbot of Murrhard’ in his Musarion
where he visited the private medical academy of Dr. (1768, 62). While in Weinsberg, Oetinger entered
Johann Philipp Kampf (1688-1753). Some results into correspondence with the Moravian premon-
of these restless years of travel and study, during stratensian Prokop Divisch (1698-1765), who also
which he underwent the most diverse influences, experimented with electricity — a contact which
were a renewed dedication to the church of Martin had been brought about by Fricker when he visited
Luther, a renunciation of his perfectionistically Divisch.
inspired separatism, a rehabilitation (since 1736) Oetinger’s period of office in Herrenberg was for
of fragmentary recognition through reason (as him particularly auspicious. His work Die Gildene
opposed to central recognition), and his decision to Zeit (1759-1761) belongs to the genre of the social
marry and take up the duties of a pastor, first in utopia, and received a natural-philosophical sup-
Hirsau, where Zinzendorf visited him in 1739. plement with Die Philosophie der Alten (1762).
In order to have direct and continuous access to This work advocates a more just social order,
the calculations concerning the Apocalypse pro- which should be based on greater equality, more
duced by his friend Bengel, Oetinger moved to equitable distribution of property, and liberty; the
Schnaitheim, in his direct vicinity. Bengel was a realization of this goal would not be achieved by
proponent of a special form of Chiliasm (cf. Reve- means of revolution, but rather through a process
lation 20), the so-called “Dischiliasm”: prior to of evolution. Its influence remains discernible right
Judgment Day, two periods of one thousand years up to Friedrich Hélderlin’s (1770-1843) Friedens-
each were expected to pass. The first of these, the feier (about 1802).
blissful millennium called by Oetinger the Gildene The first draft of an autobiography, Genealogie
Zeit (Golden Age), was to begin, according to der reellen Gedancken eines Gottes-Gelebrten,
Bengel’s calculations, in the year 1836. dated 1762, covertly quotes the title of an alche-
In Walddorf, Oetinger conducted his famous mistic treatise: Carl Herrmann Gravel (ed.), (Ber-
melisse-experiment: in the oily solution of the nardus Trevisanus), Fontina Bernhardi revelata .. .
melisse-essence which he had prepared, he recog- worinnen ...in ganz reellen und zuverlasigen Ge-
nized the shapes of countless melisse leaves, whose dancken iiber die Bereitung des Steins der Weisen
“outline and signature” had been preserved in the veroffenbaret, Erlang|en] 1750.
solution. From this he concluded ‘that God must be Oetinger’s principal work on the subject of the
physically present, but not perceived by earthly kabbalah is his Offentliches Denckmahl (1763), to
beings, in all passive agents and births’. This exper- which both Jakob Friedrich Klemm (1733-1793;
iment (which could not be replicated) was for him from 1782-1793 Hodlderlin’s dean in Niurtingen),
symbolic of the regeneration (palingenesis) of and Karl Friedrich Harttmann (1743-1815; later
plants from the ashes, and indeed, of the resurrec- Friedrich Schiller’s professor at the Karlsschule
tion of man as a result of the “life-giving power of in Stuttgart) contributed. Taking as his starting
God”. In Walddorf, he received (c. 1748) a visit point a colourful emblematic-kabbalistic picture
from the “Chymicus”, “Graf St. Germain de (Lebrtafel, i.e., teaching-table), dating from 1663,

--- Page 316 ---
OETINGER 892
which Antonia princess of Wirttemberg (1613- develops a “theology of electricity”; he interprets
1679) had donated to the church in Bad Teinach the shining light of the metal chashmal (LXX:
(1673) —a spiritual painting in the form of a trip- “elektron”; Vulgata: “electrum”) in Ezekiel’s vision
tych, believed to have been influenced by Johann (Ez 1,4. 27; 8,2) as electric fire.
Valentin Andreae’s Ein Geistlich Gemaldt (1615) — Die Eulerische Und Frickerische Philosophie
Oetinger presents a kaleidoscopic view of the Ueber Die Music (1767) underscores — in adherence
kabbalah, the natural sciences and the philosophy to the ideas of Oetinger’s friend Johann Ludwig
of his age (Boehme, Newton, Malebranche, Leib- Fricker, and as a reaction against Leonhard Euler
niz, Wolff, Swedenborg, Zinzendorf, Spener, as (1707-1783) — the importance of discord as
well as the “Philosopher of Sanssouci”, that is, opposed to concord in > music, analogous to the
Frederick the Great). This volume, which was later concept of struggle (principium luctae; cf. certamen,
to be found in the library of Goethe’s schone Seele, concert), seen as a characteristic feature of life.
Susanne Catharina von Klettenberg (1723-1774), Die Metaphysic in Connexion mit der Chemie
was esteemed by Holderlin’s private tutor, [1770] deals with the close relationship between
Nathanael Kostlin (1744-1826) and by Schelling, mind and matter: the book contains not only exten-
as well as by Eduard Morike (1804-1875) and Her- sive texts on chemistry, but also on other fields of
mann Hesse (1877-1962). The edition which had knowledge, such as medicine, Fricker’s theory of
appeared in Stuttgart in 1858 was later found in music, and philosophy. The influence of > Paracel-
Hermann Hesse’s own library, and in 1934 he sianism becomes obvious when one notes that
depicted the figure of Oetinger in preliminary stud- mention is made of the doctrine of signatures of the
ies for his Glasperlenspiel (Glass Bead Game). Paracelsus-follower Oswald Crollius (c. 1560-
Oetinger’s major systematic work is entitled 1609). The work was to be found in the libraries of
Theologia ex idea vitae deducta (1765). Here the Susanne Catharina Freiin von Klettenberg (1723-
universal scholar and theosopher Oetinger, who 1774), Moses Mendelssohn (1729-1786), Johann
strove for a leading position in the church hierar- Gottfried Herder (1744-1803) and Wolfgang
chy, attempted, in the form of a dogmatic com- Amadeus Mozart.
pendium, to clearly and distinctly demonstrate his In his Biblisches und Emblematisches Worter-
Lutheran orthodoxy. This work, which was also to buch (1776), partly a reaction against Sweden-
be found in Herder’s library, had a profound borg’s allegorical exegesis of the Bible and against
influence on pietistic thought [> Pietism] in the the rationalists, one may find (p. 407) Oetinger’s
immediate vicinity of Hélderlin and Schelling (for famous saying Leiblichkeit ist das Ende der Werke
example, on J.E. Klemm), as well as on the natural Gottes (Corporeality is the ultimate goal of God’s
philosophy of —~ Romanticism (> Franz von works). Oetinger emphasizes a realistic exegesis
Baader [1765-1841], ~ Gotthilf Heinrich von of the Bible, even more consistently than his for-
Schubert [1780-1860], Julius Hamberger [1801- mer mentor Bengel, for example when he inter-
1885]), and on Vermittlungstheologie (Richard prets images from Revelation literally, and not
Rothe [1799-1867], Isaak August Dorner [1809- symbolically.
1884]).
Swedenborgs und anderer Irrdische und himm- 3. OETINGER’S MATURE THEOSOPHY
lische Philosophie (1765; 2nd ed. Frankfurt am Having provided a synopsis of Oetinger’s intel-
Main 1773), of which Goethe in Weimar had lectual development, we will now attempt to briefly
a copy purchased for his own library in 1776, summarize the theosophy [> Christian Theosophy]
includes, amongst other things, excerpts from of the mature Oetinger. As a theosopher, Oetinger
Emanuel Swedenborg’s Arcana coelestia. Here characteristically strives to coordinate his encyclo-
Oetinger comes out quite decidedly, although not pedic knowledge: for his philosophia sacra he uti-
without qualifications, in favour of Swedenborg’s lizes not only philosophy and theology — including
conception of the reality of the realm of spirits, a Christian interpretation of the kabbalah -, but
thereby probably influencing Goethe’s Faust; later, also the natural sciences (primarily alchemy and
because of Swedenborg’s allegorical Bible inter- the physics of Isaac Newton), emblematics (which
pretations, Oetinger came to disassociate himself he uses to construct a theologia emblematica),
from him. medicine, mathematics, music, and jurisprudence.
Procopti Divisch Theorie von der meteorolo- He seeks to maintain coherence in this encyclope-
gischen Electricite (1765) contains the German dic multiplicity by means of a principle of bipolar
translation of the Magia naturalis of the above- attraction that avoids both a monistic uniformity
mentioned Prokop Divisch, from which Oetinger and a dualistic rift. According to the divine doc-

--- Page 317 ---
893 OETINGER
trine of salvation, all things in the universe are sophie der Alten wiederkommend in der giildenen
in dynamic interaction: “above” and “below”, Zeit, 2 pts., Frankfurt & Leipzig, 1762 ¢ Offentliches
heaven and earth, the invisible and the visible, body Denckmahl Der Lehr-Tafel einer weylland]. Wiirtem-
bergischen Princefsin Antonia, Tibingen, 1763 ¢ The-
and soul, the internal and the external, the Word
ologia ex idea vitae deducta in sex locos redacta,
and the works of God, both in nature and in his- Frankfurt & Leipzig, 1765 Swedenborgs und
tory, the Holy Scriptures (which are to be taken lit- anderer Irrdische und himmlische Philosophie (2 pts.),
erally according to the Biblical realism of Johann Frankfurt & Leipzig, 1765 Procopii Divisch...
Albrecht Bengel) and the Book of Nature. Never- langst verlangte Theorie von der meteorologischen
theless, God and his Word are given supreme Electricite, Tibingen, 1765 # Die Eulerische Und
authority (Oetinger uses the French word “supéri- Frickerische Philosophie Ueber Die Music, Neuwied
1767 [critical edition by R. Breymayer in: Blatter fiir
orité”). God is, like life, indissoluble; and He is
wiirttembergische Kirchengeschichte 76, 1976, 130-
the origin of all life, as differentiated from His Cre- 175] ¢ Die Metaphysic in Connexion mit der Chemie,
ation. Accordingly, the central idea of Oetinger’s Schw|abisch]. Hall [1770] ¢ Biblisches und Emblema-
Theologia ex idea vitae deducta is the eternal life of tisches Worterbuch, {Heilbronn am Neckar], 1776.
God, which radiates into six loci: the doctrines of Historico-critical edition [works, particular collec-
God, of man, of law and sin, of grace, of the tion]: Kurt Aland, Erhard Peschke, Martin Schmidt [et
alii] (eds.), Texte zur Geschichte des Pietismus, Abt. 7:Church, and of the last things. God in His actions,
Gerhard Schafer & Martin Schmidt (eds.), Friedrich
or as a life-giving entity (Deus actuosus, vel ut vita
Christoph Oetinger, Berlin & New York: Walter
vivificans), is the source of life. He wants to reveal de Gruyter, 1977ff.; Vol. 1: Reinhard Breymayer &
Himself to man as the ‘receptacle of the breath of Friedrich HaufSermann (eds.), Die Lehrtafel der Prin-
life’ in the person of Jesus Christ. Sin is alienation zessin Antonia (Offentliches Denckmahl ...), 2 pts.,
from the existence of God; Grace is the promise of 1977; vol. 2: Konrad Ohly (ed.), Theologia ex idea
new life; the Church is the Society in which the vitae deducta, 1979; vol. 3: Gerhard Schafer (ed.) /
Otto Betz, Reinhard Breymayer, Eberhard Gutekunst,
spirit of life is active. The arrival of the “last
Ursula Hardmeier, Roland Pietsch, Guntram Spindler
things” will mean the end and termination of life: (assoc. eds.), Biblisches und Emblematisches Worter-
the transitory life of the human creature will be buch, 2 pts., 1999.
changed into eternal life when the unity of body Autobiographies and letters: Karl Christian Eberhard
and soul is indestructibly restored as Geistleib- Ehmann (ed.), Friedrich Christoph Oetingers Leben
lichkeit. At the end of time will come the universal und Briefe, Stuttgart: J.F. Steinkopf, 1859.
reconciliation through Christ, the “salvation of
Lit.: Ernst Benz, Swedenborg in Deutschland: EC.
nature”, in accordance with the doctrine of the
Oetingers und Immanuel Kants Auseinandersetzung
“restoration of all”. Oetinger finds fault with Leib- mit der Person und Lehre Emanuel Swedenborgs,
niz’s theory of monads because for Leibniz God is Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klostermann, 1947 ¢
the supreme monad, criticizes his concept of har- Otto Betz, “Friedrich Christoph Oetinger und die Kab-
mony as atomistic, and emphasizes that, according bala”, in: Oetinger, Worterbuch (1999), vol. 2, 1-41
to Acts 17:28, life and activity take precedence over Reinhard Breymayer, “Friedrich Christoph Oetinger
und die Emblematik: Zu Oetingers Emblematischem
mere existence. The Sensus communis makes the
Worterbuch”, in: Oetinger, Worterbuch (1999), vol. 2,
experiences of daily life in nature and society 42-70 @ Pierre Deghaye, “Realiter und idealiter: Zum
accessible to interpretation by the Holy Scriptures, Symbolbegriff bei Friedrich Christoph Oetinger”,
and allows us to communicate on the basis of Pietismus und Neuzett 10, (1984), 66-89 @ idem, De
living, clearly evident experiences of faith (dog- Paracelse a Thomas Mann: Les avatars de ’hermétisme
mas). Oetinger’s emphasis on experience is a her- allemand, Paris: Dervy, 2000, 118-195 # Antoine
Faivre, Philosophie de la Nature: Physique sacréeitage of authors like Paracelsus, J.V. Andreae and
et théosophie, X VIII°-X1X° siécle, Paris: Albin Michel,
+ Gottfried Arnold.
1996, 181-252 @ Tonino Griffero, Oetingere Schelling: |
Teosofia e realismo biblico alle origini dell’idea-
Aufmunternde Griinde zu Lesung der Schrifften Jacob lismo tedesco, Cassina de’ Pecchi: Nike, 2000 ¢ Sigrid
Boehmens, Frankfurt & Leipzig, 1731 # Die Ver- Grofmann, Friedrich Christoph Oetingers Gottesvor-
klérung Jesu in seiner Braut ... durch ein... Exem- stellung: Versuch einer Analyse seiner Theologie,
pel des Lebens der Seeligen Maria de la S. Thérese, G6ottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1979 ¢ Wouter
Nebst einem Herrlichen Auszug Ihrer Briefe..., J. Hanegraaff, “Swedenborg’s Magnum Opus and its
Frankfurt, 1734 # Abrifs Der Evangelischen Ordnung Reception” [section on Oetinger and Swedenborg],
zur Wiedergeburt, Frankfurt & Leipzig, 1735 # Inqui- in: Emanuel Swedenborg, Secrets of Heaven (New
sitio in sensum communem et rationem, Tubingen, Century Edition), West Chester, Pennsylvania: Swe-
1752, 1753 @ Die Warheit des Sensus Communis, 2 denborg Foundation, 2005 ¢ Ursula Hardmeier,
pts., Stuttgart, (1753-)1754 ¢ Die Giildene Zeit, pts. “Friedrich Christoph Oetingers Kampf gegen ‘falsche
1-3, Frankfurt & Leipzig, 1759-1761 ¢ Die Philo- Schriftauslegung’”, in: Oetinger, Wérterbuch (1999),

--- Page 318 ---
OETINGER 894
vol. 2, 108-128 # Rainer Piepmeier, Aporien des occult philosophy [> occult/occultism]. Olcott
Lebensbegriffs seit Odcetinger, Freiburg [Breisgau], was keenly aware of the budding field of psychical
Miinchen: Karl Alber, 1978 ¢ Roland Pietsch, research and claimed a number of the pioneers
“Friedrich Christoph Oetinger und Jakob Bohme: Vom
of that movement as personal friends. He was
innersten Grund der Natur”, in: Oetinger: Worterbuch
especially interested in > animal magnetism and (1999), vol. 2, 71-84 # Wolfgang Schoberth, Ge-
schopflichkeit in der Dialektik der Aufklarung: had considerable success as a healer in India.
Zur Logik der Schépfungstheologie bei Friedrich He translated Adolphe d’Assier’s Posthumous
Christoph O0ctinger und Johann Georg Hamann, Humanity: A Study of Phantoms (1887) and was
Neukirchen-Vluyn: Neukirchener Verlag, 1994 ¢ interested in the French psychologist Charcot’s
Guntram Spindler, “Das ‘Worterbuch’ als Werk der work, visiting his laboratory. His great contribu-
Philosophia sacra”, in: Oetinger, Wérterbuch (1999),
tion to the field of esoteric literature is his rambling
vol. 2, 85-107 @ idem (ed.), Glauben und Erkennen:
narrative of his life in Theosophy, Old Diary Die Heilige Philosophie von Friedrich Christoph
Oetinger: Studien zum 300. Geburtstag, Metzingen/ Leaves. Originally serialized for over a decade, it
Wiurtt.: Ernst Franz, 2002 « Martin Weyer-Menkhoff, contains his meetings with some of the major
Christus, das Heil der Natur: Entstehung und Sys- figures in the r9th century occult revival as well as
tematik der Theologie Friedrich Christoph Oetingers, tales of things witnessed with yogis and swamis of
G6ttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1990 ¢ Rolf
India. Although he had eagerly promoted Mme.
Christian Zimmermann, Das Weltbild des jungen
Blavatsky at the beginning of their work, he later Goethe: Studien zur hermetischen Tradition des
deutschen 18. Jahrhunderts, vol. 1, Munchen: Wilhelm became critical, though still regarding her as a gen-
Fink, 1969, 149-158, 260-264 and passim; vol. 2, ibid. uine agent of a secret school.
1979, 353-372; 2nd ed. vol. 1, ibid., 2002, 170-180, Olcott remains an important witness for the exis-
300-305. tence of the Mahatmas, Blavatsky’s Indian teach-
ers. He claimed to have met some of them while in
REINHARD BREYMAYER India and to have received letters from them inde-
pendently of Blavatsky. He was suitably impressed
Olcott, Henry Steel, *2.8.1832 by some of these incidents. In 1888 on a trip from
Orange, New Jersey, + 17.2.1907 India to confront Blavatsky in London about her
Adyar (India) decision to start an esoteric school in the Society, he
received a letter in his cabin from one of the Mahat-
President-Founder of the > Theosophical Soci- mas describing his thoughts on deck a few minutes
ety, which he helped inaugurate in 1875 and of before and advising to take a less combative role
which he remained President until his death. After with Blavatsky, which he acceded to. He is usually
distinguishing himself in the field of agricultural portrayed as a dupe not confederate of Blavatsky’s,
reform early in life, Olcott became an assistant edi- but he felt that his past record ‘proves me to have
tor on the New York Tribune in those areas. At the been neither the one nor the other’.
outset of the Civil War he enlisted, eventually Under his presidency the position that the Theo-
becoming an investigator for the War Department. sophical Society had no dogma or creed was
By the time of the founding of the Theosophical emphasized. When the Vice-President of the Soci-
Society he was a well-connected New York lawyer. ety, William Q. Judge (1851-1896), was charged
The accounts of his investigation of a family of with circulating letters from the Masters, Olcott
mediums in rural Vermont, serialized in the New adjourned the committee that had convened in
York papers, drew > Helena Petrovna Blavatsky 1894 to hear testimony. Although he was con-
to meet him. Their idea of a Society to investi- vinced about the reality of the Masters, any pro-
gate the hidden mysteries of nature did not flourish nouncement by the organization on such matters
in America, and in 1879 Olcott transferred the would ‘violate the most vital spirit of our federal
headquarters to India where he would spend the compact, its neutrality in matters of belief’. His
rest of his life. Establishing over a hundred insistence on democratic resolutions of the institu-
branches of the Society throughout the subconti- tion’s problems has continued to make his Society
nent during the 1880s, he also agitated for the unique among esoteric groups.
Buddhists of Ceylon. Aside from his part in helping establish modern
While the Theosophical Society became an Theosophy, Olcott is remembered in South Asia as
effective means for the transmission of eastern one of the pioneers in the Buddhist revival. He fos-
philosophy to the west, it served the reverse tered Buddhist unity in Ceylon and encouraged
function in Asian countries, being the major dialogue between their co-religionists in Thailand,
means of importing western hermeticism and Burma and Japan. He traveled throughout the

--- Page 319 ---
895 OPHITES
region getting the different groups to sign a com- Adversus omnes haereses, a 3rd-century document
mon declaration of Fourteen Fundamental Bud- possibly based on a lost work by Hippolytus, is the
dhist Beliefs that they all agreed on. At one point he first to describe a system of teachings explicitly
even contemplated retiring from the presidency of ascribed to the heresy of the “Ophites” (c. 2). In
the Theosophical Society to devote all his time to his account he claims, first, that they honor the
work for a united Buddhist world. serpent for providing the knowledge of good and
For Olcott Theosophy was not some ‘sort of evil (Gen. 3). That serpent was recognized by >
far-away sunrise that we must try to clutch’, but Moses in the desert when he made the bronze
‘a lamp to light our feet about the house and in our serpent (Num. 21), and Christ compared himself
daily walks’. While he was not a leading theorist to the serpent (John 3:14). The author adds that
for the movement he more than made up with his the Ophites introduce this serpent into their
organizational skills, and his stress on the practical eucharistic services. Second, the Ophites’ system
side of theosophical ethics helped impart a staid of doctrine is laid out: from a single Aeon several
respectability to the Society. When he died at the others were emanated, to which was opposed
age of 74 at the Society’s headquarters at Adyar, another being called Ialdabaoth, who produced
Madras, his cremation was attended by representa- seven angelic sons and claimed to be the sole
tives from the different regional religions. God. The inferior angels made man, who remained
powerless and worm-like until he was given a
Henry Steel Olcott, Theosophy, Religion and Occult spark from the Aeon above. Ialdabaoth emitted
Science, London: George Redway, 1885 ¢ Applied the serpent, who introduced Eve to the forbidden
Theosophy and Other Essays, Adyar: Theosophical tree, and thus conferred upon humankind the
Publishing House, 1975 # Old Diary Leaves, six vols., saving gnosis.
Adyar: Theosophical Publishing House, 1974-1975
The first part of the account in Ps.-Tertullian
(covering the years 1874-1898) ¢ Trans. Adolphe
consists of what appears to be a brief summary of
d’Assier, Posthumous Humanity, London: George
Redway, 1887. a gnostic midrash (biblical exegesis) on the serpent
of Genesis 3, probably of Jewish origin, such as is
Lit: Michael Gomes, The Dawning of the Theosophi- embedded in the third tractate of Nag Hammadi
cal Movement, Wheaton, Illinois: Quest Books, 1987 Codex IX, the Testimony of Truth (45, 23-49, 7).
Stephen Prothero, The White Buddhist: The Asian The second part is a highly abbreviated summary
Odyssey of Henry Steel Olcott, Bloomington, Indiana: of a system described in considerable detail by Ire-
Indiana University Press, 1996 # Jacob N. Kinnard, naeus in his Adversus Haereses (Against Heresies).
“The White Buddhist: The Asian Odyssey of Henry
There Irenaeus adds to his account of the system of
Steel Olcott”, The Journal of Religion 77:4 (1997),
the “Gnostics” (Adv. Haer. I, 29) related material 669-679 # Gananath Obeyesekere, “The Two Faces of
Colonel Olcott: Buddhism and Eurorationality in the ascribed to unnamed ‘others’ (I, 30). It is these
Nineteenth Century”, in: U. Everding (ed.), Buddhism ‘others’ who are later identified as “Ophites” by
and Christianity: Interactions between East and West, Ps.-Tertullian and other heresiologists (e.g., Theo-
Colombo: Goethe Institute, 1994. doret, Haer. 14: ‘the Sethians, whom some call
Ophians or Ophites’). A strict reading, in context,
MICHAEL GOMES of Irenaeus’ account of these “others” can be taken
as referring to a sub-group of the “Gnostics” ear-
Ophites lier described by him (Haer. I, 29) in an account
which was clearly based upon a primary Gnostic
The Ophites, also called “Ophians”, are a text, and which closely corresponds to a passage
group of Gnostic Christians [> Gnosticism] now found in the Apocryphon of John from Nag
discussed by several of the church fathers, so Hammadi (NHC II, |; Ill, 1; IV,1; BG 2).
named because they honored the “snake” or “ser- The system of the ‘others’ described by Irenaeus
pent” (Greek ophis) as a revealer of saving gnosis. posits a first Light, Father of all, from whom
Another group of Gnostics has a similar basis for emanates a series of aeonic beings including Christ
their name, ~ “Naassenes”, based on the Hebrew and, finally, Sophia-Prunicos. Caught up in the
word nahash (“snake, serpent”). “Ophians” are waters of Chaos she produces a son who produces
associated with other heretics called “Cainites” a son who produces a son, etc. These beings add
by > Clement of Alexandria (Stromateis VIII, 17) up to a total of seven, each of them ruling over
and Hippolytus (Refutatio VIII, 20), but those a heaven (i.e., a heavenly sphere). The first is
writers provide no discussion of the sect’s teach- Jaldabaoth (son of Sophia), then come lao,
ings. The author of Pseudo-Tertullian’s treatise, Sabaoth, Adoneus, Eloeus, Oreus, and Astaphaeus.

--- Page 320 ---
OPHITES 896
Jaldabaoth also produces a snake-like being, a ritual called “the Seal”, featuring a dialogue
associated with all manner of evil. Ialdabaoth in which a leader called “Father” imparts instruc-
claims to be the only God, but is rebuked by his tions concerning seven ‘angels of light’ and seven
mother. Ialdabaoth and his companions create ‘archontic angels’. The archontic angel’s chief,
man, breathing into him the residue of their spiri- identified as the Creator and ‘God of the Jews’ (VI,
tual power, of which they are now bereft. Adam 27), is said to be accursed ‘because he cursed the
and Eve, thanks to the snake, eat of the forbidden serpent which imparted to the first man knowledge
fruit and achieve knowledge of the Power above. of good and evil’ (VI, 28).
Eventually Christ descends into this world, enter- Origen returns to a description of the diagram,
ing Jesus, who is killed through the machinations and identifies the seven archontic angels, who were
of Ialdabaoth and his henchmen. Christ, who has evidently depicted on the diagram as theriomor-
departed from Jesus before the crucifixion, raises phic beings named Michael (lion), Suriel (bull),
Jesus up to a position in the heavens where he Raphael (serpent), Gabriel (eagle), Thauthabaoth
gathers the souls of the elect. The end will come (bear), Erathaoth (dog), and Thaphabaoth or
when all of the traces of the spirit of light have Onoel (ass) (VI, 30). He then reports what the ini-
been gathered. tiates are taught to say at the ‘gates of the Archons’
Epiphanius of Salamis provides another account in their ascent through the heavens, giving the text
of the Ophites (Panarion 37, 1, 1-7, 6), based of the prayers to be directed to each of the archons.
on Irenaeus and Pseudo-Tertullian, and spiced These archons are named: Jaldabaoth (lion-like),
with numerous vituperations. Epiphanius adds lao, Sabaoth, Adonai, Astaphaeus, Ailoaeus, and
one interesting detail: they keep an actual snake Horaeus (VI, 31).
in a basket. When it is time for their “mysteries” There follow in the text further details regarding
(Eucharist) the snake crawls onto the table and the diagram, featuring additional circles, a rectan-
coils up on the loaves (Panarion 37, 5, 6). This may gular figure somehow connected with the ‘gates of
be nothing more than a fanciful elaboration of the paradise’, ‘the trees of knowledge and life’, and
cryptic statement in Pseudo-Tertullian regarding certain words inscribed (‘Love’, ‘Life’, ‘Wisdom’,
the role of the serpent in the Ophite Eucharist. ‘Knowledge’ (gnosis), etc.).
The 2nd-century pagan writer Celsus wrote an The complicated diagram described by Celsus
attack on Christianity (the True Doctrine) which is and Origen is hard to envisage, though there have
known only from excerpts and refutations pro- been scholarly attempts to reconstruct it with
duced by Origen in his treatise Against Celsus. In drawings. It was probably inscribed on papyrus or
the context of a discussion of the soul’s journey vellum, and the zoomorphic archons and angels
through the seven heavens, Celsus describes a were presumably drawn on the diagram. The cos-
diagram said to be in use by certain Christians in mology reflected in it is closely related to that of the
their “Mystery” (Origen, Cels. VI, 24-38). Origen Gnostics described by Irenaeus and the Apoc-
informs us that the diagram in question, which ryphon of John. Indeed, the names of the seven
he himself has seen, is not that of Christians at archons of the Ophite Diagram are the same as
all but of the sect of the Ophians (already men- those given by Irenaeus in his description of the
tioned at Cels. III, 13). The extensive description “other” Gnostics (Haer. 1.30). It is clear that the
of the diagram in Origen’s text is partially that diagram was associated somehow with rituals,
of Celsus, and partially that of Origen, who especially such as were meant to promote the soul’s
adds details based on his own alleged examination safe journey to heaven. The actual function of the
of it. diagram itself may have been that of a mandala, an
The diagram ‘contained a drawing of ten circles, aid to mystic contemplation and meditation.
which were separated from one another and held “Ophite” Gnostics evidently used other artistic
together by a single circle, which was said to be talismans as well. Two “Gnostic” gems deserve
the soul of the universe and was called Leviathan’. mention here. The first is an oval pendant of green
It also featured another beast called Behemoth, jasper (No. 188 in the Bonner collection). On its
said to be ‘fixed below the lowest circle’. The dia- obverse is carved a lion-headed god with the names
gram depicted Leviathan again on the outer circle laldabaoth and Aariel (Heb. “lion god”) on the
of the diagram as a snake with its tail in its mouth right and left edges respectively (it should be noted
(VI, 25-26). that Ilaldabaoth and Ariel are equated in the treatise
Celsus’ description of the diagram was evidently On the Origin of the World; NHC II, 100, 23- 26).
followed by a discussion of the uses to which it The reverse has an inscription of 8 lines: Ia
was put by the sect that owned it. Celsus mentions (undoubtedly an abbreviation of Ialdabaoth), Iao,

--- Page 321 ---
897 OPHITES
Sabaoth, Adonai, Eloi, Oreos, Astapheos, i.e. the selves Peratae’ (Ref. V, 16, 1) really “Ophites” (or
names of the seven archons of Irenaeus’ “other” “Ophians”)? Or are they, simply, “Gnostics”?
Gnostics and of the Ophite Diagram. To arrive at a satisfactory answer to these ques-
The second gem is a pendant of black steatite. tions we turn, finally, to two tractates of the Nag
On its obverse is carved the figures of Adam and Hammadi library: the Hypostasis of the Archons
Eve on either side of a tree with a coiled snake. The (NHC II, 4) and the treatise On the Origin of the
Hebrew letters beth (for hayyiym, “life”) and World (NHC Il, 5). Hyp. Arch. is a tractate that is
daleth (for da‘at, “knowledge”) also occur. On the usually included among those labeled by scholars
reverse is a circular band with 12 sections, each as “Sethian”, reflecting a Gnostic system whose
with a boss in it. The band, representing the most important witness is the Apocryphon ofJohn.
Zodiac, encircles an “omphalos” around which In one interesting passage paraphrasing and inter-
coils a snake with open mouth. On either side of preting the biblical paradise narrative (Gen. 2-3)
the band are a crescent moon accompanied by heth it is said that the ‘Spiritual Woman’ (the heavenly
(for hodesh, “moon”) and a shin (for shemesh, Eve = Sophia) comes into the serpent and gives
“sun”). Below the sun are seven small bosses, pre- instruction (gnosis) to the fleshly Adam and Eve
sumably representing the planets. These two gems (II, 89, 30-91, 3). A more expansive parallel is
probably functioned as amulets, reminding their found in Orig. World, where the origin of the
wearers that it is gnosis, revealed by the serpent, “Instructor” is discussed. His mother is Eve-Zoe,
that enables the elect to traverse the heavenly who is ‘the Instructor of Life’. The Instructor
spheres and finally attain true life. himself is referred to by the archontic authorities
The evidence thus far considered raises an as the ‘beast’ (Gr. therion), wiser than all others
interesting question: were there actually people are (cf. Gen. 3:1). When the archons command
in Antiquity who called themselves “Ophites” Adam and Eve not to eat of the tree of knowledge,
or “Ophians”? We have seen that the names the Instructor advises Eve to eat of it anyway. She
“Ophite” and “Ophian” were given by the church eats and instructs Adam to do so as well (II, 113,
fathers to certain heretics on the grounds that 21-116, 8). This passage reflects word-plays possi-
these heretics honored the knowledge-revealing ble only in Aramaic (“serpent” — “Eve” — “life” -
serpent. But we have also seen that the earliest “instruct”). Here we have material of the sort that
system actually described in any detail of doc- is attributed by some heresiologists to a supposed
trines later identified as “Ophite” was not so “Ophite” or “Ophian” sect.
labeled at all by the heresiologist in question, We can conclude this discussion with the fol-
i.e. Irenaeus. Was Irenaeus unaware of the true lowing observation: it might be useful for schol-
identity of those “others”? ars to refer to an “Ophite” type of Gnosticism
The matter becomes more complicated when we when describing material featuring the serpent
note the claim made by Origen that these impious as revealer. But that kind of Gnosticism is found
heretics take pride in referring to themselves as in texts and testimonies that are not restricted at all
“Ophians”, taking their name from the snake to an “Ophite” sect. That Gnosticism was wide-
that they revere (Cels. VI, 28). He also adds the spread, and may have lasted in Eastern Syria until
following interesting detail: ‘they boast that a cer- the end of the 8th century, at least according to the
tain Euphrates was the man who taught them testimony of the Nestorian writer Theodore bar
their impious doctrines’ (ibid.). This is interesting Konai (Liber Scholiorum, memra 11).
because Euphrates is the person who is said by Hip- What is important, finally, is not the heresiologi-
polytus to have been a founder of the sect of the cal label, but Gnosis itself, whatever the revelatory
“Peratae” [> Perates] (Ref. V, 13, 9). The system mediation might be, whether the serpent, Sophia in
described by Hippolytus is quite different from that her various manifestations, Seth and his avatars, or
described by Irenaeus (Haer. I, 30). However, there (in Christian Gnosticism) Jesus Christ. There may
is one passage in Hippolytus’ discussion of the Per- or may not have been people who called themselves
atic system (Ref. V, 16, 7-14) that contains now “Ophians” (as claimed by Origen). There certainly
familiar material: the ‘true perfect serpent’ was were Gnostics, i.e. adherents of that multi-faceted
shown to the Israelites by Moses in the desert phenomenon called “Gnosticism” or “the Gnostic
(Num. 21). This universal serpent is ‘the wise word religion”.
of Eve’ (Gen. 3) that finally appeared in the form of A. Rousseau & L. Doutreleau (eds.), Irénée de
the Son of Man who, like the bronze serpent in the Lyon: Contre les Hérésies (SC 264), Paris: Les Editions
desert, was to be ‘lifted up’ (John 3, 14). Are the du Cerf, 1979 (with French translation) ¢ Engl. trans-
people who according to Hippolytus ‘call them- lations: W. Foerster (ed.), Gnosis: A Selection of

--- Page 322 ---
OPHITES 898
Gnostic Texts, 1, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972, 84- ture, and doctrinal content of the OTO: in fact,
99 ¢ B. Layton, The Gnostic Scriptures: A New Trans- practically all the major events in its complex his-
lation with Annotation, 170-181 # A. Kroymann (ed.), tory — and especially its foundation, the succession
(Ps. Tertullian] Adversus omnes haereses (CC, ser. Lat.
of its leaders, and the emergence of several off-
II, originally edited in CSEL 47), Turnhout: Brepols,
shoots from the original branch — have been a 1954 ¢ Engl. translation in A. Roberts & J. Donaldson
(eds.), The Ante-Nicene Fathers: Translations of the matter of dispute and remain controversial. As is
Fathers down to A.D. 325, Ul, repr. Michigan, Grand often the case with esoteric organizations, the
Rapids: Wm B. Eerdmans, 1963, 650-651 ¢@ K. Holl OTO has produced its own historical account of
(ed.), Epiphanius II: Panarion haer. 34-64, 2nd rev. ed. its origins and development; but unfortunately,
by J. Dummer, Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1980 ¢ much of it is based on scanty or unverifiable evi-
F. Williams, The Panarion of Epiphanius of Salamis,
dence. Thorough scholarly research, drawing a
Book I (Sects 1-46), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1987, 241-247
clear line between fact and fiction, has started to J.M. Robinson (ed.), The Nag Hammadi Library
in English (3rd rev. ed.), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1987 ¢ develop only recently. Given these problems, what
M. Marcovich (ed.), Origenes: Contra Celsum libri follows is an account of this organisation based
VIII (Suppl. to VC, LIV), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2001 on what is at present available both in primary and
Engl. translation: H. Chadwick, Origen: Contra secondary sources, with the qualification that
Celsum, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
several details may eventually have to be revised if
1965, 337-354- more documents and scholarly research become
available. Lit.: C. Bonner, Studies in Magical Amulets, Chiefly
Graeco-Egyptian, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan The origins of the OTO can be traced to the
Press, 1950, 135-138, 184, plate IX ¢ S. Gero, “Ophite activities of a group of German-speaking occult-
Gnosticism according to Theodore Bar Koni’s Liber ists, who gathered, by the turn of the 2oth century,
Scholiorum”, in: H. Drijvers et al. (eds.), IV Sympo- around three main figures. One was the Austrian
sium Syriacum 1984: Literary Genres in Syriac Litera- citizen, paper chemist and industrialist Carl Kell-
ture: (Orientalia christiana analecta 229), Rome: Pont.
ner (1850-1905). The other two were Germans:
Institutum Studiorum, 1987, 265-274 # E. Goode-
the noted theosophist > Franz Hartmann, and nough, “A Jewish-Gnostic Amulet of the Roman
Period”, Greek and Byzantine Studies 1 (1958), 71-80 the ex-opera singer, radical political activist, and
¢ B. Pearson, “Jewish Haggadic Traditions in The Tes- journalist Theodor Reuss (1855-1923). The evi-
timony of Truth from Nag Hammadi (CG IX, 3)”, in: dence concerning their relationship and collabo-
idem, Gnosticism, Judaism, and Egyptian Christianity, ration dates back at least to the 1890s, when it
Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1990, 39-51 @ B. Pearson, appears that they were all actively involved in the
“Gnostic Iconography,” in: idem, Gnosticism and
occultist scene then developing in the German-
Christianity in Roman and Coptic Egypt, New York
and London: T & T Clark International, 2004, 249- speaking countries, and especially in Vienna. Kell-
267 @ B. Witte, Das Ophitendiagramm nach Origenes’ ner and Hartmann in particular had a close
Contra Celsum VI, Altenberge: Oros Verlag, 1993, relationship.
22-38. Kellner was a wealthy man, whose business
activities caused him to travel widely in Europe and
BIRGER A. PEARSON America. Like most of the early protagonists in the
history of the OTO, he was a Freemason, and had
Ordo Templi Orientis many interests in what was then loosely defined
as the “occult”, especially yoga, > alchemy, and
Occultist organisation and initiatic Order, some- high-degree masonry [> Freemasonry]. In 1896 he
times also spelt as “Order of Oriental Templars”. published a pamphlet on yoga (Yoga: Eine Skizze
The OTO was founded at the beginning of the z2oth tiber den psycho-physiologischen Teil der alten
century and has remained, up to the present, an indischen Yogalehre; Yoga: A sketch upon the
important vehicle for the transmission of esoteric psycho-physiological part of the ancient Indian
ideas and practices. One of its major features is the Yoga teaching) which focused mainly on hatha
practice of sexual magic, which is considered the yoga practices, and can be considered as one of the
core of its teaching. The role accorded to Eastern earliest essays on the topic by a Westerner from a
doctrines and sexual magic makes the OTO differ- practitioner’s point of view. There is no evidence,
ent from several other magically-oriented, occultist although it has sometimes been asserted, that he
societies, and especially from the only one compa- ever travelled to India or the Far East (unlike Hart-
rable to it in terms of influence and visibility: the > mann, who was in India with > H.P. Blavatsky
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn (GD). between 1883 and 1885); but it is very likely that
It is extremely difficult to assess the history, struc- his knowledge of yoga was also based on first-

--- Page 323 ---
899 ORDO TEMPLI ORIENTIS
hand sources. In fact, he appears to have come in of the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia [SRIA],
contact, in the same period, with two Indian gurus, among other things) and, most importantly, the
Bheema Sena Pratapa and Mahatma Agamya masonic scholar John Yarker (1833-1913), who
Paramahamsa (who were then touring through had been at the centre of most fringe-masonic
several European countries, in search of disciples) activity in Great Britain during the last quarter of
and with an Arab fakir, Hadji Soliman ben Aissa. the century. From Yarker and Westcott, Reuss
The evidence concerning these relations is too scant obtained charters, between 1901 and 1902, to
to allow for any definite conclusion concerning create German sections of several high-grade
their real import, and especially concerning the masonic rites: first the Rite of Swedenborg (6
nature of any spiritual technique that Kellner might degrees), then Cerneau’s version of the Ancient
have learned through them. Nevertheless, the issue and Accepted Rite (33 degrees), and finally Yarker’s
has some importance, because Kellner has tradi- version of the combined rites of Memphis and
tionally been presented as the original source for Misraim (97-90 degrees). From Westcott alone,
the fundamental teaching of the OTO, i.e. sexual furthermore, he obtained a warrant to found a
magic. However, neither in Kellner’s extant papers College of the SRIA in Berlin. In the same year
nor in his published writings are there clear and Reuss also started to publish his periodical, the
explicit references to practices involving a sexual Oriflamme, which would serve in the following
element. Indeed the notion itself of “sexual magic” years as the official organ for all his fringe-masonic
would appear for the first time in Reuss’s publica- and initiatic organizations. At first Reuss’s masonic
tions only after Kellner’s death. activity met with a certain success. High degree
As for Reuss, already as a young man he was freemasonry had not been particularly active in
involved in theosophical, Wagnerian and Lebens- Germany during the roth century, and some
reform circles in Germany and England, and he curiosity was aroused in masonic circles by Reuss’s
was a keen supporter of the then burgeoning femi- Rites. At its peak, around 1905, Reuss’s masonic
nist movement. Even if his interests at that time network in Germany, although “irregular” from
seem to have been primarily political, it is likely the point of view of mainstream masonic obedi-
that he became acquainted with the occultist ideas ences, could count on several hundred members
then freely circulating in those milieus. He spent and/or affiliates. It appears that both Kellner
long periods in England, while not residing in Ger- and Hartmann were actively involved in Reuss’s
many, and in 1876 he was initiated into a regular masonic activities, also contributing occasionally
masonic lodge in London. During the 1890s he to the Oriflamme. The pages of the Oriflamme
began to be seriously interested in occultism and contain some hints at the existence of an “Inner”
fringe masonry. Whatever may have been the role or “Occult Circle” within this masonic network,
of Kellner and Hartmann in the creation of the very probably led by Kellner, Hartmann and Reuss
OTO, to which we will return below, it is clear that (a sort of triumvirate referred to as the “Inner
Reuss was the real motor behind the creation of a Triangle”); but no further details are given about
vast fringe-masonic network, which would prove a e.g. the teachings which may have been imparted in
fundamental step toward the foundation of the this context.
Order. In the years around 1895-1902 he first The relationship between Reuss and > Rudolf
attempted, together with Leopold Engel (1858- Steiner also falls in this period. In 1906, Reuss
1931), to revive the Order of the > Illuminaten granted Steiner an authorization to form a sec-
of Adam Weishaupt (1748-1830). However, the tion of Yarker’s Antient and Primitive Rite, called
relationship with Engel soon came to an abrupt “Mystica Eterna”. Steiner, then the leader of the
end; in 1902 the two parted ways, and the Order German section of the > Theosophical Society
remained under Engel’s direction. In the same (Adyar), was in fact looking for some traditional
period Reuss also got acquainted with Gérard ritual setting that he might use to frame the teach-
Encausse ( Papus), then a prominent figure in the ings of his inner group, the Esoteric School. He had
European esoteric and fringe-masonic scene, who come to the conclusion that high-grade masonry
introduced him to his Martinist Order (~ Martin- might provide it. In this context, it has often been
ism: Second Period). But the important turning assumed that Steiner became a member of the
point in Reuss’s fringe-masonic career came when OTO, and that Mystica Eterna was indeed but
he got in contact, around 1901, with two English- a section of this Order. However, the available
men, who were the depositories of a large number evidence suggests otherwise: at the time when
of fringe-masonic filiations then active in Europe: Reuss gave this authorization to Steiner, the OTO
+> William W. Westcott (Supreme Magus, i.e. chief, simply did not exist as an organization proper.

--- Page 324 ---
ORDO TEMPLI ORIENTIS 900
Rare hints to “Oriental Templars” in the pages of Lingam-Yoni. This was actually little more than
the Oriflamme (to which we will return), or in the the German translation of a book by > Hargrave
charters Reuss was then delivering, are the only Jennings, Phallicism (1884), in which the inner
evidence that might have some relation to what meaning of all religious traditions was explained
will later manifest itself as the OTO. No evidence through, and reduced to, sexual symbolism. It is
subsist of a particular, distinct structure, or of also in 1906 that the Belgian spiritualist and
specific teachings connected to the “Oriental Tem- occultist Georges Le Clément de Saint-Marcq
plars” label at the time. Nevertheless an important (1865-1956) published his essay L’Eucharistie,
point must be noted: whereas Reuss’s masonic which would become one of the most important
Orders had generally followed, so far, the tradi- sources for Reuss’s ideas on sexual magic. More-
tional masonic policy in accepting only male mem- over, again in 1906, vague allusions to an un-
bers, Steiner’s section admitted both men and specified Order of “Oriental Templars” appeared
women. This did actually anticipate what would in the pages of Reuss’s Oriflamme, although totally
later be one of the main features of the OTO, i.e. unrelated to the issue of “sexual magic” or the
mixed membership. It seems that, apart from the alleged sexual initiations. But the main reason why
charters and the rituals he received from Reuss, 1906 has been considered by some authors to be
Steiner was not otherwise interested in Reuss’s the actual year of foundation of the OTO, is the
masonic activities or ideas, and there is no evidence existence of two pamphlets dated that year, which
of a relationship between the two after 1907. contain an English and a German version of the
We now come to one of the turning points first constitution of the OTO. We come here to one
in the early history, or rather prehistory, of the of the many mysteries in the history of the Order.
Order. Despite Reuss’s initial success, around While the problems related to these two publica-
1905 the tide suddenly turned. Kellner, who tions cannot be discussed here in detail, there are
may have been a source of financial support, died; reasons to believe that they were actually published
and Reuss’s masonic empire started to crack. later, probably between 1910 and 1912. In sum: all
Some high ranking members of his lodges became the — admittedly garbled — evidence seems to point
disillusioned with his credentials and claims to the possibility that in or around 1906 a project
to masonic regularity, and started to attack him was taking shape in Reuss’s mind, and that this
in masonic periodicals. There were also lurid project was aimed at the teaching, in the context of
rumours about initiations performed by Reuss that an inner circle of disciples, of ideas strongly con-
allegedly involved homosexual elements. Whatever nected with sexual symbolism, and possibly also of
the truth behind these allegations (strongly denied psycho-physical techniques involving a sexual ele-
by Reuss), he left Germany and moved to London ment. It is also likely that this project came soon to
in early 1906. It would appear that, as a result, he a stop due to the scandalous rumours that began to
lost control of most of the lodges belonging to his be spread by the members of his Orders. This
masonic network, and relatively few members con- would explain why the references to sexual magic
tinued to work under his authority, in Germany or (and, incidentally, to the Oriental Templars), dis-
elsewhere. It is interesting that in relation to these appeared again from Reuss’s publications until
events the expression “sexual magic” appears for 1912. Whether or not such a project ever existed in
the first time in the pages of the Oriflamme (it Reuss’s mind in 1906, it cannot be related in this
would remain the only instance until 1912), but period to any particular, recognisable structure or
expressly to deny that Reuss’s high-grade masonic organisation calling itself OTO.
rites had anything to do with it. The reference was In 1908 an international conference of spiritual-
ambiguous in so far as there were also hints that istic masonic rites was organised by Papus and his
something of the kind was possibly taught and group in Paris. Reuss was among the invited
practised in some inner structure, which would of masonic dignitaries. This meeting certainly led to
course be the “Occult Circle” already referred to. another exchange of charters and authorisations,
But this was not all. The rumours about sexual and it was probably at this occasion that Reuss was
initiations may have been false, exaggerated, or introduced to Joanny Bricaud’s (1881-1934) Gnos-
based upon misunderstandings, but clearly in tic Catholic Church (Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica,
Reuss’s vision the sexual element was by now EGC; later renamed by Bricaud Universal Gnostic
explicitly assuming a central role. In the same year Church), to which Papus and his close collabora-
1906, while the rumours were on the way to tors also belonged. This was an offshoot of the >
becoming an utter scandal in the international Gnostic Church, a neo-Gnostic group founded
masonic press, he published a book entitled around 1890 by Jules Doinel (1842-1902). It is

--- Page 325 ---
901 ORDO TEMPLI ORIENTIS
important here, because in subsequent years refer- the actual year of foundation of the OTO. Hart-
ences to > gnosticism would become a common mann died in the same year, before the announce-
feature of OTO documents, and the Order would ments appeared. He does not seem to have been
often be presented as organically linked to the particularly involved in Reuss’s activities after
EGC. Starting from around 1918, this connection Kellner’s death and he may not have approved of
would be strengthened further, as some of Reuss’s the plans of the former; but officially he had kept
publications seem to refer to an EGC autonomous his position in his high-grade masonic Orders. Pos-
with respect to Bricaud’s Church. From. this sibly his death was not unrelated to the sudden
moment on, the EGC connected to the OTO could appearance of the Order.
be considered a new, independent offshoot, stem- In the Jubilee issue the name of the Order finally
ming from the branch of neo-Gnostic organiza- appeared unequivocally as OTO. The very name
tions. Leadership in the OTO would often can perhaps help us understand the nature of
automatically imply leadership in this branch of Reuss’s project. It obviously places the organiza-
the EGC. tion in the tradition of neo-templarism (~ Neo-
Sometime between 1910 and 1912, Reuss, who Templar Traditions), but the OTO’s reference to
was then living in London, met > Aleister Crowley, the Templar myth may have had a particular mean-
the other figure who would make a fundamental ing less evident in other neo-Templar groups. A cer-
contribution to the birth and the early development tain neo-Templar tradition had come to see the
of the OTO. According to the traditional history of Templars as a revolutionary force opposing both
the Order, based mainly on Reuss’s and Crowley’s secular and religious institutions. From that per-
own accounts, Kellner and Reuss would have spective, traditional accusations to the effect that
founded the OTO long before the latter met Crow- the Templars had indulged in magic and in illicit
ley. In 1910 Crowley would have met Reuss for the sexual practices, and venerated an exotic idol of
first time, and would have been introduced by him unknown origin named Baphomet, could also be
into the Order as a simple member. Then, in 1912, seen in a positive light. This “countercultural”
when Reuss would have realised that Crowley had image of the Templars was certainly congenial to
come very close to discovering, on his own, the Reuss’s and Crowley’s radical ideas concerning
secret of sexual magic, he would have appointed social, political, and religious reform. Their pro-
him head of a newly created section of the Order ject, including of course a major role for sexual and
for Great Britain, called Mysteria Mystica Maxima occultist aspects, could therefore find a convenient
(M.°.M.:.M.:.). However, a reconsideration of the vehicle in an organization claiming a link with the
available evidence, and especially of the timing of Templar legacy. As to the “ Eastern ” component in
the events, suggests that some parts of this story the Order’s name, apart from a possible reference
may not be accurate. In fact it seems more likely to the traditional, symbolic image of the masonic
that the decision to (re-)launch his project of the “Orient”, it obviously pointed to the alleged origin
OTO was taken by Reuss only after having met of some of the Order’s teachings, particularly yoga
Crowley. Reuss probably decided to revive his old and/or sexual magic.
project once he realised that he could avail himself In the Manifesto published in the Oriflamme, the
of Crowley’s enthusiastic collaboration; and if so, OTO presented itself as a sort of super-Order that
the two collaborated on the project right from the synthesised the structure and the knowledge of a
start. Reuss evidently found in Crowley a person large number of initiatic organizations. Prominent
who might sympathise with most of his radical among them were, of course, the high-grade
ideas on religion, society, and politics; who already masonic rites in which Reuss had a position of
disposed of a circle of followers and disciples, but authority. In this sense Reuss called the OTO
for various reasons was looking for another struc- an “Academia Masonica” (although he attributed
ture beside his own initiatic Order, the A..A.-.; the definition to Kellner). However, the Order was
and, finally, who had the intellectual and literary not conceived as a mere synthesis of high-grade
skills to expand Reuss’s initial fringe-masonic masonry. Beyond a certain level, the member was
structure and develop a complete magical doctrine supposed to receive a complete course in “hermetic
out of Reuss’s elementary sexual techniques. The science” (the expression was probably borrowed
existence of the OTO was announced in the second from Papus), as well as to learn about this mysteri-
half of r9r2 both in the Oriflamme (in the so-called ous secret of “sexual magic”. Reuss of course also
“Jubilee” issue) and in Crowley’s own periodical offered his version of the history of the Order, and
The Equinox. At least as far as the organisational Kellner was referred to as the “spiritual father” of
aspect is concerned, 1912 may therefore be seen as the OTO. The available evidence does not permit

--- Page 326 ---
ORDO TEMPLI ORIENTIS 902
us to conclude that Kellner ever thought of creat- the concept was already present before Crowley,
ing an Order like the OTO, but it is not inconceiv- and he always admitted that its “secret” had been
able that the idea was originally suggested by transmitted to him by Reuss. But very little is
him, perhaps in the context of the “Occult Circle”. known about what Reuss really meant by “sexual
The same remark would also apply to Reuss’s magic”, and what kind of techniques he taught or
statement concerning Kellner as the original source practised before meeting Crowley. We know a
for the teachings of “sexual magic”. great deal more, on the other hand, about how
Another interesting element, which has given rise Crowley interpreted the idea, which he developed
to much speculation, is Reuss’s reference to a Her- and systematised considerably during the rest of his
metic Brotherhood of Light with which Kellner had life. It is no exaggeration to say that, for him, the
supposedly been in contact, and of which the OTO discovery of sexual magic was a kind of new
would merely be the continuation under a new revelation, which substantially modified his way
name. The history of this (possibly fictitious) occult of understanding and practising magic. In 1914
fraternity, and its relationship with the > Hermetic Crowley started to experiment methodically with
Brotherhood of Luxor remain unclear. It has been it, and soon afterwards he began writing a series of
argued that it might have been an offshoot of > instructions, which have become part of the stan-
Paschal Beverly Randolph’s Brotherhood of Eulis, dard curriculum for the highest degrees in most
and that Kellner might have been in contact with it. contemporary OTO filiations. At the basis of
The link to Randolph could then be construed as OTO’s sexual magic (which differs from Ran-
a possible source for Kellner’s supposed notions dolph’s) is the idea that the male and female bodily
of sexual magic. But unfortunately there is no fluids produced during sexual intercourse may be
evidence in support of this possibility. In any case, “energised” through a particular kind of mental
the Hermetic Brotherhood of Light (also under its concentration. During the operation, the mind
Latin name: Fraternitas Lucis Hermetica, FLH) has must remain steadily focused on its goal, be it of a
remained, to this day, an important mythical refer- material or spiritual nature. The mixing of semen
ence in the literature connected to the OTO. There and female secretions produces an “elixir”, which
is, on the other hand, evidence that Yarker himself is ingested by the practitioner or smeared on talis-
was in possession of some unpublished writings by mans to produce the desired effect. But it should be
Randolph, containing an exposition of his sexual noted that, in Crowley’s version, the Order taught
ideas and techniques, and that Randolph’s writings also other forms of sexual magic, based on mastur-
were in fact circulating more widely than has been bation and anal intercourse. All these forms corre-
supposed in English occultist milieus at the turn of spond to degrees of the Order, to which we will
the century. Yarker may then have been a possible return below.
medium for Randolph’s ideas to influence Reuss, if Crowley’s second contribution was, unlike the
not directly Kellner. first one, radically new. It was his own religious
From the very beginning, Crowley, who signi- message called “Thelema”, based on the text of a
ficantly took the name “Baphomet” in the Order, revelation he had received in 1904. Crowley, who
put a lot of energy in recruiting new members for by 1912 had already convinced himself of his role
his M..M..M.. and in developing the system. as the prophet of a new spiritual age, evidently saw
Women were admitted in his section from the very the OTO as a convenient tool to spread his reli-
beginning. He set up a lodge in London and was gious message. It is interesting to note that in
able to establish some bodies in other countries accepting Reuss’s invitation to take a leading posi-
under his jurisdiction, such as South Africa and, tion in the OTO, he did not abandon his own
later, Canada and Australia. He also started writ- Order, the A..A... He saw the aim of the two
ing new rituals and re-writing the old ones pro- orders as fundamentally different: while the OTO
vided by Reuss. In 1913, during a visit in Moscow, was meant to be the utopian model of a future soci-
he wrote the “Gnostic Mass”, which was to ety based on the principles of Thelema, the A..A..
become one of the most important rituals per- remained an esoteric school which offered the
formed in the Order, and the central ceremony of means to attain individual self-realisation, basi-
the EGC. Its sexual symbolism is evident, but, cally along the lines of the Golden Dawn system.
unlike the initiation rituals, it was conceived as a Reuss seems to have reacted favourably to Crow-
public ceremony, open to non-members. ley’s suggestions and innovations. Some features of
Apart from writing rituals, Crowley made two Thelema, such as the rejection of the Christian
main contributions to the OTO. The first one is the notion of sin and the advocacy of sexual freedom,
development of sexual magic. We have seen that certainly appealed to him.

--- Page 327 ---
903 ORDO TEMPLI ORIENTIS
The structure of the Order was defined in several numerals, XI represents an « “inversion” of IX, just
documents published by Reuss and Crowley, espe- as anal intercourse may be seen as an “inversion”
cially between 1912 and 1919. While there have of vaginal intercourse.
been changes and revisions later, the essential ele- In the early years, Reuss’s masonic network was
ments have remained unaltered. The OTO is based exploited to promote the new Order. Charters were
on a scale of ten degrees, indicated by Roman delivered on that basis to bodies and individuals in
numerals. The first nine degrees are split into three various countries, such as Italy and France, with
triads. In Reuss’s version, the first triad is com- whom Reuss had friendly relations. However, it is
posed of an outer circle of probationers, and its last unclear to what extent those who received these
degree (III°) is equated with masonic Craft; the sec- charters, and who could now claim a degree in the
ond triad is composed of students and lay-brothers, Order, were aware of its inner teachings; and there
and is considered as equivalent to the combined is scanty evidence that any of them did actually
degrees of those high-grade masonic rites over practice its system or rituals. In any case, most of
which Reuss held authority; finally, the third triad these international relationships were shattered by
is composed of the real initiated members of the the storm of World War I. Crowley spent this
OTO, and the implication is that it begins where all period in the United States, whereas Reuss, after a
other masonic rites end. Subsequently, Crowley first period in Germany, preferred to move to neu-
added some elements, in particular attributing a tral Switzerland. There he joined the progressive
name to the different triads (1: Man of Earth, 2: community inspired by Lebensreform theories,
Lover, and 3: Hermit), and attenuated the empha- which was then flourishing on Monte Verita, close
sis on the equation of grades between the OTO sys- to Ascona. In 1917 he sponsored there the foun-
tem and high-grade masonry. Crowley’s additions dation of an OTO Lodge. The activities of the
would be largely adopted during the subsequent group of persons associated with Reuss in this
history of the OTO, all the more so as the Order period, which included the famous Austrian dancer
increasingly abandoned most of its masonic claims. Rudolf von Laban (1879-1958), then also residing
Ever since Crowley’s involvement in the Order, at Monte Verita, are at the origin of one of the
but possibly even before, the teachings concerning branches, still based in Switzerland, that presently
sexual magic have been associated with the VIII° claims a direct filiation from the original OTO. In
(techniques based on masturbation) and, espe- 1920 Reuss was involved in the organization of an
cially, the IX° degrees. Theoretically, only on international masonic conference, along the lines
attaining this latter degree the central secret of the of the one held in Paris in 1908. Probably he
Order, consisting in the use of the mixture com- thought he could revive his masonic network of the
posed of male and female bodily fluids, is revealed pre-war period. But the attempt failed, and he was
completely to a member. Therefore, there appears unable to stir the same interest that the Order had
to be a sort of equivalence between the degree in enjoyed before the war.
the Order and the practice of this kind of magic. Nevertheless, Reuss was still in contact with sev-
The final degree (X°) does not correspond to an ini- eral figures of the occultist and fringe-masonic
tiatic advancement, but rather to an administrative scene who showed an interest in the OTO. The first
office. It is attributed to the Grand Master, or and most famous of them was > Harvey Spencer
“Supreme King”, of a national body of the Order Lewis, the founder of the Ancient and Mystical
(Crowley in the case of Great Britain, for instance). Order Rosae Crucis (AMORC). For some time,
The whole Order, including all its national bodies, Lewis partly based his controversial Rosicrucian
is ruled by an international leader, called “Outer claims on the charters he received from Reuss. A
Head of the Order” (OHO, the name was probably second important figure was Arnoldo Krumm-
borrowed from theosophical parlance). Obviously Heller (1876-1949), whom Reuss had already met
the first OHO was Reuss himself. Other degrees in 1908 at the Paris masonic conference. Krumm-
have been sometimes added to the basic structure Heller was German by birth, but spent long periods
of the Order. The most important is the XI° degree: of his life in Latin American countries, especially
an addition by Crowley, concerned with the knowl- in Mexico. He probably received a charter to run
edge and practice of sexual magic based on anal a body of the OTO in Latin America, but he does
intercourse (whether homo-, or hetero-sexual). not seem to have ever worked along the lines of
The fact that the XI° numerically follows on the X° the Order. He preferred to found, in 1927, his
does not imply that its holder has greater authority: own organization, the Fraternitas Rosicruciana
its attribution is explained not with reference to the Antiqua (FRA), which he considered as allied to
degree scale, but with the fact that, in Roman the OTO and the EGC. The FRA is still active

--- Page 328 ---
ORDO TEMPLI ORIENTIS 904
today in many Spanish-speaking and South Amer- not a complete success for Crowley, and the
ican countries. Krumm-Heller’s initial introduc- Pansophic movement split into different factions.
tion to the OTO had been through Reuss, but Some decided to accept Crowley as leader, but
in the early 1930s he met Crowley as well, with others did not, since they refused to adopt the
whom he collaborated for some time when they religious message of Thelema. From these events
were both residing in Berlin. Another important originated the > Fraternitas Saturni (FS), which
contact of Reuss’s in these last years of his life was founded by a former member of the Pan-
was with the German occultist and bookseller sophic movement, Eugen Grosche (1888-1964).
Heinrich Tranker (1880-1956), who was then Its practices and doctrines are strongly indebted
trying to assemble in Germany a neo-Rosicrucian to the OTO, but the FS also stressed from the
movement called “Pansophia”. very beginning its organisational independence
During Crowley’s stay in the United States, his from it.
collaboration with the pro-German propaganda If immediately after the war Reuss had been
had a negative effect on the Order in England. unable to reconstitute his masonic network,
The London lodge was raided by the police in Crowley, during his subsequent leadership, did not
1917, and as a consequence most of the members even try. His interest for the masonic aspects of the
resigned or dispersed. The OTO would not be OTO had already been very limited, and was even
able to reconstitute an organized body on English further reduced after he took over the leadership.
soil again during Crowley’s lifetime. Crowley During the inter-war period most of his followers
returned to Europe in 1919. He probably did not were also OTO members. They were concentrated
meet Reuss again, but they initially kept in con- first in Germany and later in the United States, but
tact, although their relationship was getting very few of them, if any, had a masonic back-
increasingly strained. Perhaps Reuss felt his leader- ground. The political situation, with the spread of
ship threatened by Crowley’s strong personality totalitarian and authoritarian regimes in many
and influence, and they finally broke off any further countries all over the European continent, was
communication. Reuss died in 1923, and it is then less favourable not only to the international
unclear whether he left any instruction as to who relationships between masonic or fringe-masonic
was to succeed him as head of the Order. Crowley bodies, but in some cases to the very existence of
later claimed that Reuss had suffered a stroke in these organisations. This is certainly an important
1921 and, unable to take care of the Order’s factor for understanding the gradual loss of the
administration, had decided to resign in his favour. OTO’s masonic character after Reuss’s death.
But this claim is extremely unlikely: Crowley was During the last years of Crowley’s life, the activ-
never able to produce the alleged document of ities of the Order decreased considerably. The nazi
appointment, and what remains of the Crowley- regime wiped away what remained of the Order in
Reuss correspondence rather indicates that Reuss Germany, and, in the last years of Crowley’s life,
did not consider Crowley a valid candidate for his the only functioning body of the OTO was the
succession at all. However this may be, after Agape Lodge, a body established in California
Reuss’s death Crowley appears to have had no under the leadership of Wilfred Talbot Smith
serious competitor for his claim. Two of the (1885-1957), and later of the chemical engineer
remaining X°s gave their approval to Crowley’s John Whiteside Parsons (1914-1952). In his will,
taking the position of OHO. They were Charles Crowley named Karl Germer, then living in the
Stansfeld Jones (1886-1950), who had been an old United States, to be his successor as OHO. After
disciple of Crowley’s but had also been chartered as Crowley’s death, and during Germer’s leadership,
an X° for the United States by Reuss, and Heinrich the Order did not develop considerably. It did very
Tranker, X° for Germany. However, Crowley’s little to publicise its existence or to recruit new
claim to leadership had yet to pass another test. members. When Germer died, in 1962, the Order
During a conference in 1925 in Weida, Germany, was on the brink of extinction. The Agape Lodge
some prominent members of Tranker’s Pansophic had died out in the 1950s, and most of those who
movement, which included the German OTO as had been involved with the Order in the United
well, gathered to discuss the issue in the presence of States were scattered and did not seem interested in
Crowley himself. Among them was the business- furthering its activities. Moreover, Germer had left
man Karl Germer (1885-1962), who would later no clear dispositions as to his succession.
become a close collaborator of Crowley’s, and From this point on, it becomes extremely diffi-
play an important role in the subsequent history cult to follow closely the vicissitudes of the Order.
of the Order. The outcome of the meeting was Only a short outline will be given here. Four main

--- Page 329 ---
905 ORDO TEMPLI ORIENTIS
branches have claimed an exclusive filiation from OTO. It originated from the activities of another
the OTO. All of them have been involved in con- direct disciple of Crowley’s, the Englishman Ken-
troversies about their respective primacy over the neth Grant (b. 1923). He had served as Crowley’s
other ones. Without entering into the details of secretary during the last years of his life. Grant,
these controversies, it can be said that all four may who presently still runs this branch, had received in
be considered to represent a legitimate continua- the early 1950s a charter from Germer to create an
tion of the ideas and the practices of the original OTO Lodge in England. Later, dissension between
OTO, in so far as they can all claim a more or less the two men had arisen, and in 1955 Germer had
direct link with one of the first three OHOs, ice. expelled Grant from the Order. Soon afterwards,
Reuss, Crowley, and/or Germer. Grant, who now denied the validity of the Crow-
The most important and most visible among ley-Germer succession and consequently the lat-
them is undoubtedly the branch based in the United ter’s right to expel him, claimed the position of
States and usually referred to as the “Caliphate” OHO for himself. In the early 1970s Grant began
OTO. At its origin, we find a direct disciple of his career as an independent writer and published
Crowley’s, Grady Louis McMurtry (a.k.a. Hyme- the first volumes of a series of three Typhonian
nezus Alpha, 1918-1985), who had met Crowley Trilogies (completed in 2002). In these works
several times in the 1940s, while he was posted in Grant has put forward an original interpretation of
England as a US officer. Soon after the end of the Crowley’s writings, partly based upon his direct
war the Californian Lodge was experiencing a experiences in the workings of his lodge. Unlike
period of difficulties and turmoil, and Crowley sent the Caliphate OTO, which represents a some-
McMurtry two letters appointing him as his repre- what “orthodox” wing in the nebula of Crowleyan
sentative in the United States, under the authority movements, Grant has added several elements
of Germer. After Crowley’s death, McMurtry dis- which were absent in earlier OTO traditions. They
tanced himself from Germer for several years, due include the results of communications from “extra-
to disagreement about the latter’s policy. As we terrestrial entities” (which are also at the basis of
have seen, Germer died in 1962, but McMurtry his claim of authority), and a renewed emphasis on
only learned about this by the end of the 1960s. He Eastern doctrines, Tantrism in particular. Grant’s
then decided to avail himself of Crowley’s letters to system is also marked by a strong influence from
proclaim his authority over what remained of the the works of other occultists such as Austin Osman
Order in the United States. He presented himself as Spare (1886-1956), and sometimes even from liter-
“Caliph”, rather than OHO, because in a letter to ary themes, such as the Cthulhu mythology of
him Crowley had used the term in relation to his Howard Phillips Lovecraft (1890-1937).
(i.e. Crowley’s) succession, implying an obvious A third OTO branch, usually referred to as
analogy with the notion of “Caliph” in the history “Swiss OTO”, is based in Switzerland and may be
of Islam. Helped by some old members of the then considered an inheritor of the lodges Reuss had
defunct Californian Lodge, McMurtry proceeded established in that country between the end of
to re-organise the Order in the United States. The the r9ros and the early 1920s. The group was
group was incorporated as a religious, non-profit organized in the early 1950s under the leadership
organization in 1979. After McMurtry’s death, of Hermann Joseph Metzger (Paragranus, 1919-
in 1985, he was succeeded by William Breeze 1990), who had been in contact with some of
(Hymenzus Beta, b. 1955), who presently runs Reuss’s old disciples. Metzger was also in contact
this branch of the Order. Under his leadership with Germer during the latter’s leadership, and his
the organization has developed considerably, group was Officially recognised by the OHO at that
creating a large network of new bodies outside of time. After Germer’s death, Metzger claimed to
the United States, including Europe. At several have been elected as new OHO by the ranking
occasions this branch’s claim to exclusive owner- members of his group. One interesting feature of
ship of the name OTO (at least in the United States) Metzger’s branch is the fact that, in his version, the
and of Crowley’s copyright has been confirmed by OTO is tightly linked with the Order of the Illumi-
court judgements. The Caliphate OTO, availing nati (IO), the other Order revived by Reuss and
itself of the ownership of Crowley’s copyright, has Engel at the turn of the century. After Metzger’s
set as one of its priorities the publication of new death, in 1990, the leadership has passed to
editions of Crowley’s works. This branch has by far Annemarie Aschbach (b. 1926).
the largest membership, and is present in many The fourth branch is perhaps the smallest one,
countries all over the world. and is the result of the activities of Marcelo Ramos
Another branch is the so-called “Typhonian” Motta (1931-1987), a Brazilian citizen and former

--- Page 330 ---
ORDO TEMPLI ORIENTIS 906
disciple of Germer’s in the 1950s. After Germer’s (1978), 28-46 @ idem, Merlin Peregrinus: Vom Unter-
death, Motta claimed the title of OHO, and for grund des Abendlandes, K6nigshausen — Wirzburg:
Neumann, 1986 ¢ Massimo Introvigne, I/ cappellosome time was supported in this by Germer’s
del mago: I nuovi movimenti magici, dallo spiritismo
widow. Motta and his followers tried to set up a
al satanismo, Milan: Sugarco, 1990 ¢ Peter-Robert
viable organization in Brazil and in the United Konig, Der O.T.O. Phainomen REMIX, Munchen:
States, which took the name “Society Ordo Templi Arbeitsgemeinschaft fiir Religions- und Weltanschau-
Orientis” (SOTO) and started to publish new edi- ungsfragen, 2001 # Martin P. Starr, The Unknown
tions of Crowley’s writings with Motta’s commen- God: W.T. Smith and the Thelemites, Bolingbrook: The
taries. In 1985 the latter’s position was challenged Teitan Press, 2003 « Wolfgang Weirauch, “Eine Reise
nach Wien: Bei den Quellen des O.T.O. Interview mit
by McMurtry’s group, which successfully sued him
Josef Dvorak”, Flensburger Hefte 63:4 (Winter, 1998),
for copyright infringement. Motta died two years 171-222 A vast amount of useful information may
later, while several of his ex-disciples had already also be found on Peter-R. Konig’s website, entirely
joined the Caliphate branch. Nevertheless, some of devoted to the “OTO phenomenon” and its history:
his followers, based mostly in Australia and Brazil, http://www.cyberlink.ch/~koenig/.
have taken up his legacy and still continue some
activity under the SOTO label. MARCO PASI
Finally, brief mention should be made here of
other groups whose origin is somewhat related to Orientalism
the OTO, but which have developed into new and
different directions. We have already encountered 1. DISCOVERY OF ORIENTAL TRADITIONS
Grosche’s Fraternitas Saturni and Krumm-Heller’s 2. ENTHUSIASM FOR ORIENTAL TRADITIONS
FRA. Another significant group is the Ordo Templi 3. ECLECTICISM AND SYNTHESIS
Orientis Antiqua (OTOA), also called “Franco- 4. TRADITIONALISM
Haitian OTO”, created and led by Michael Berti-
aux (b. 1935). Bertiaux, a well known figure in the In the current acceptance of the term (based on
contemporary American occultist scene, claims a Said 1979), Orientalism is an attitude towards
direct filiation from Reuss’s OTO through Papus “the Orient” on the part of a self-defined “Occi-
anda family of Haitian occultists, although no doc- dent” which may or may not correspond with
umentary evidence has been offered to back up this realities in the regions in question. This attitude
claim. His organization, which has also attracted has prevailed in the religious field, where the dis-
some following outside the US, notably in Spain tinction between Christian and non-Christian has
and Italy, is characterised by an original mixture of long carried an emotional charge, and, in the
Crowleyan magic and voodoo traditions. minds of missionaries, a responsibility. It also
continues to define the academic discipline. How-
Francis King (ed.), The Secret Rituals of the O.T.O., ever, when viewed from the point of view of
New York: Samuel Weiser, 1973 # Hymenzus Beta esotericism, a contrary tendency emerges in which
(ed.), The Equinox — The Review of Scientific Illumin-
the commonality of Orient with Occident is more
ism — The Official Organ of the O.T.O., vol. 3, 10
important than their differences.
(March 1986), York Beach: Samuel Weiser ¢ Peter-
Robert Konig (ed.), Der kleine Theodor-Reuss-Reader,
Minchen: Arbeitsgemeinschaft fiir Religions- und 1. DISCOVERY OF ORIENTAL
Weltanschauungsfragen, 1993 ¢ idem, Materialien TRADITIONS
zum OTO, Arbeitsgemeinschaft fiir Religions- und The following survey concentrates on the
Weltanschauungsfragen, 1994 ¢@ idem, Der grosse regions of Asia east of the River Indus. They first
Theodor-Reuss-Reader, Munchen: Arbeitsgemein-
entered European consciousness after the Indian
schaft fiir Religions- und Weltanschauungsfragen,
campaign of Alexander the Great (327-325 B.C.). 1997 # idem, Noch mehr Materialien zum OTO,
Minchen: Arbeitsgemeinschaft fiir Religions- und An increasing curiosity, especially about the Brah-
Weltanschauungsfragen, 2000 ¢ Theodor Reuss and mins, surfaces in the writings of Diodorus Siculus
Aleister Crowley, O.T:O. Rituals and Sex Magick, (Bibl. ii), Strabo (Geog. xv), Arrian (Indike), Apu-
Thame: I-H-O Books, 1999. leius (Florida), > Clement of Alexandria (Strom. i,
Lit.: John Patrick Deveney, Paschal Beverly Randolph:
iv), and, most extensively, Palladius (De gentibus
A Nineteenth-Century Black American Spiritualist,
Indiae et Bragmanibus, sometimes attributed to
Rosicrucian, and Sex-Magician, Albany: State Univer-
sity of New York Press, 1997 @ Ellic Howe and Helmut St. Ambrose).
Moller, “Theodor Reuss: Irregular Freemasonry in Not much more was known of Oriental phi-
Germany, 1900-23”, Ars Quatuor Coronatorum 91 losophy and religion until the epoch of the Jesuit

--- Page 331 ---
907 ORIENTALISM
missionaries (16th-r7th cents.). Their reports 2. ENTHUSIASM FOR ORIENTAL
were collected by > Athanasius Kircher in China TRADITIONS
monumentis ... illustrata (1667), but Kircher’s Three events facilitated a transition from curios-
derivation of all Oriental religions from Egypt dis- ity about Oriental religions (whether literary or
torted his presentation. Further information came scholarly) into enthusiasm and admiration for
from the Protestant missionary Abraham Roger them. The first was the reforming effort of Ram-
(in B. Picart, Cérémonies et coutumes religieuses, mohun Roy (1772-1833), who tried to apprise
1728, vol. Il, i), the travelers Francois Bernier Hindus of the virtues of (Unitarian) Christianity,
(1620-1688), John Holwell (1701-1788), Paulinus and Europeans of that of Vedanta. Rammohun’s
a Sancto Bartolomeo (1764-1806), Abbé Jean- example and his translations of Hindu works
Antoine Dubois (1765-1848), and the first trans- had a strong influence on the American Tran-
lator of the Upanishads, Abraham Hyacinthe scendentalists, especially Ralph Waldo Emerson
Anquetil-du Perron (1731-1805). (1803-1882). The second was the immense suc-
With the British colonization of Bengal (1765), cess of The Light of Asia (1879), by Sir Edward
Oriental studies moved into a more scholarly Arnold (1832-1904). This poetic exposition of
mode. Sir William Jones (1746-1794) founded the Buddhism was the first to make it seem attractive
Bengal (later the Royal) Asiatic Society (1784) and to the West, and compatible with a liberal Chris-
the journal Asiatic Researches (1788). Sir Charles tianity. The third event was the move of the >
Wilkins (1750-1836) translated the Bhagavad- Theosophical Society’s founders, > H.P. Blavatsky
Gita (1785). In Germany, Johann Gottfried von and > H.S. Olcott, to India (1878) and their for-
Herder (1744-1803) prepared the ground for an mally becoming Buddhists. The popular interest
acceptance of India as a source of wisdom (Ideen in Buddhism due to Arnold’s book paved the way
zur Philosophie der Geschichte der Menschheit, 4 for a reputed “esoteric Buddhism” revealed by the
vols., 1784-1791), and his friend Johann Friedrich Theosophical Society’s Mahatmas, supposedly res-
Hugo von Dalberg (1760-1812) made translations ident in Tibet (A.P. Sinnett, Esoteric Buddhism,
from the English orientalists. German Sanskrit 1883).
scholarship was founded by the brothers August The connections of the zoth-century propaga-
Wilhelm von Schlegel (1767-1845; translations tors of Buddhism to the West are instructive. Alex-
of Bhagavad-Gita, 1823, Ramayana, 1829) and andra David-Neel (1869-1969) was a Theosophist
Friedrich von Schlegel (1772-1829; Uber die in London and in Paris before she made her
Sprache und Weisheit der Inder, 1808). intrepid journeys to Tibet that informed her best-
Accurate knowledge of Buddhism arrived later, selling works. Allan Bennett (1872-1923), was a
especially with B.H. Hodgson on Nepal and Bhutan magical companion of > Aleister Crowley before
(Asiatic Researches 16, 1828), Alexander Csoma de he became a Buddhist monk in Sri Lanka (1902).
Koroés (1784-1842) on Tibet (Ibid., 20, 1836/39), Bennett returned to London in 1908 as a mission-
and the reports of missionaries to China and Japan ary for the Hinayana or Theravada School. W.Y.
in the Journal of the American Oriental Society Evans-Wentz (1878-1965), translator of the clas-
(1843-80). The scholars Eugéne Burnouf (1801- sics of Tibetan Buddhism for Oxford University
1852), Max Miiller (1823-1900), and Barthélemy Press, emerged from the Theosophically-influenced
Saint-Hilaire (1805-1895) were expert philologists, “Celtic Twilight” (The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Coun-
but uncomprehending of Buddhism. Miller, Profes- tries, 1911). Christmas Humphreys (1901-1983),
sor of Comparative Philology at Oxford, edited the as a High Court judge and prolific author the most
series Sacred Books ofthe East (1875-1901), which visible of English Buddhists, edited the Mahatma
for the first time made the Confucian and Taoist Letters (3rd ed., 1962). Nikolai Konstantinovich
classics available in reliable translations. Roerich (1874-1947), the great painter of Hima-
While Romantic novelists and_ belle-lettrists layan landscapes and devotee of the Shambhala
found in the newly-discovered Orient an attrac- myth, was married to the Russian translator of The
tive stimulus to their imaginations, they shared Secret Doctrine. In a way, it can be said the Theo-
the attitudes and assumptions of these early schol- sophical Society also brought the genuine “esoteric
ars. The Orient might be fascinating, its discovery a Buddhism” to the West.
great enrichment of knowledge, but it was After World War II, an interest in Japan brought
seen as irrevocably different from the Occident. Any new visibility to the work of Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki
virtues found in Oriental beliefs and practices were (1870-1966), the preeminent scholar of Zen Bud-
a cause for condescending surprise, as if a child had dhism and the Mahayana School. Suzuki had lived
shown unwonted brilliance and maturity. in America (1897-1909), and was also an admirer

--- Page 332 ---
ORIENTALISM 908
of the Western mystical and theosophical tradition, East and West was > Julius Evola, one of whose
particularly Meister Eckhart and > Swedenborg. earliest works was an edition of the Tao-Te-King
His work now became the unintended parent of a (1923). Another was Giuseppe Tucci (1894-1984),
pseudo-Zen Buddhism among the Beatniks and in authority on Tibet, who edited the English-lan-
the arts. A more significant trend was the importa- guage journal East and West (1950-), to which
tion, from the 1970s onwards, of various schools Evola was a frequent contributor.
of Tibetan Buddhism, aided by the prestige of the The impulse to seek the underlying harmony of
exiled 14th Dalai Lama (b. 1935). The Karma all esoteric traditions, irrespective of geography,
Dzong community in Boulder, Colorado, led by was especially strong in English-speaking lands.
Chégyam Trungpa (1939-1987), was the first of Some prominent figures are > G.R.S. Mead and >
many such centers. W.B. Yeats, the inspirational writers Paul Brunton
Among Hindus, Swami Vivekananda (1863- (1898-1981) and ~ Manly Palmer Hall, the poet
1902) was the first since Rammohun Roy to gain a and > Blake scholar Kathleen Raine (1908-2003),
following in America, which he visited in 1893- and many members of Raine’s Temenos Academy.
1895 and 1899-1900. Jiddu Krishnamurti (1895- For these eclectics, the journey to the Orient,
1986), who was selected as “World Teacher” by whether literal or only in the mind, was an essential
the neo-Theosophists > C.W. Leadbeater and > initiation, but it led them away from “Orientalist”
Annie Besant (1847-1933), declared his independ- attitudes.
ence from them in 1929 and spent the rest of his life In a class of their own were four men whose
as an unattached writer and lecturer. A great num- contribution to scholarly Orientalism was beyond
ber of Indian “gurus” followed in the 1960s and question, yet who made no secret of their own
19708, many of them finding success in California. commitment to esoteric doctrines. One, the Zen
+ C.G. Jung made his own contribution to Ori- master D.T. Suzuki, has already been mentioned.
entalism by writing forewords to the I Ching and Another was the English judge Sir John Wood-
the Taoist Secret of the Golden Flower, though he roffe (1865-1936), who as “Arthur Avalon” trans-
warned that yoga and other Oriental practices lated the major works of Hindu Tantra. Woodroffe
were inadvisable for those born in the West. Apart was a Shaivite initiate, as was Alain Daniélou
from these works and the Tao Te King, the (1907-1994), author of Hindu Polytheism (1964).
influence of Taoism in the West came less through As a musicologist, Daniélou was responsible for
literature than through martial arts. The national UNESCO’s series of recordings of non-Western
Japanese religion of Shinto also inspires some music. His work in comparative religion promoted
martial arts, and imparts its aesthetic coloring to the pre-Vedic, Dravidian civilization of India
Zen Buddhist culture. The influence of the Jain reli- over the better-known Aryan invaders: he saw the
gion entered unawares, via the great admiration Dravidian god Shiva as equivalent to Dionysus.
felt in the West for Mohandas K. Gandhi (1869- Ananda Kentish Coomaraswamy (1877-1947)
1947), and thus indirectly influenced the peace was an Anglo-Indian trained as a geologist, who
movements. became a curator at the Boston Museum of
Fine Arts. Coomaraswamy’s monumental work
3. ECLECTICISM AND SYNTHESIS ranges over Hinduism, Buddhism, Sufism, Chris-
Once the traditions of the Orient were made tian esotericism, Platonism, and many lesser-known
accessible, it was possible to believe that at the eso- schools and traditions.
teric level, East and West shared the same wisdom,
both being branches of a primordial trunk. This 4. TRADITIONALISM
was but an extension of the Renaissance idea of Coomaraswamy’s name has often been coupled
a prisca theologia [> Tradition]. > Fabre d’Olivet with that of his sometime correspondent René
(Histoire philosophique du genre humain, 1824) Guénon. Known (by others) as “Traditionalists”,
was perhaps the first to include the Orient in an and currently in the USA as “Perennialists” [>
esoteric synthesis, and the notion was taken up at Tradition], they developed a kind of esoteric
the fin-de-siécle by Saint-Yves d’Alveydre and > syncretism which they called “metaphysics”. They
René Guénon. It had less success in the German- found its clearest exposition in the language of
speaking lands, where Ariosophists [> Ariosophy] Vedanta, which then served as a key, or a touch-
cultivated fantasies of ancient European esoteri- stone, for all other esoteric philosophies. The Tra-
cism, and > Anthroposophy an esoteric Christian- ditionalism of Guénon and his admirers differed
ity to which other religions were merely preludes. in one important regard from the eclecticism of
In Italy the main proponent of the esoteric unity of Theosophical inspiration: it held that the life of the

--- Page 333 ---
999 ORLEANS
esotericist must be complemented by the practice York: Columbia University Press, 1984 (orig. French
of an exoteric religious tradition. The majority of ed. 1950) # Arthur Versluis, American Transcenden-
Traditionalists chose, like Guénon, to become talism and Asian Religions, New York, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1993 # Brooks Wright, Inter-
Muslims and to seek initiation in a Sufi lineage.
preter of Buddhism to the West: Sir Edwin Arnold,
To those who were drawn to Eastern religions, New York: Bookman Associates, 1957.
such as the Buddhist traveler and musician Marco
Pallis (1895-1989), the claims of revealed religion
were of less interest, and their “traditionalism” less JOSCELYN GODWIN
strict.
Guénon, Coomaraswamy, and all the later Tra- Orléans, Louise Marie Thérése Bathilde
ditionalists were harshly critical of the modern d’, Duchess of Bourbon-Condé,
West, as having renounced its own traditions and *gi9. 4950 Saint 'Clotid, prom. 1822
infecting the rest of the world with its deviances. Paris
Thus they erected another sort of Orientalism, con-
trasting a “traditional” Orient that now included Bathilde d’Orléans was born in the chateau of
the Muslim world with a “counter-traditional” Saint-Cloud just outside Paris. Her father was
Occident. Only, unlike those responsible for forg- Louis-Phillipe d’Orléans, Duke of Orléans; her
ing the original attitudes of Orientalism, they mother, Louise-Henriette de Bourbon, was the
identified themselves with the alien side. > Frithjof daughter of Louis-Armond II, Prince of Conti. She
Schuon (1907-1998) was probably the last of them was a cousin of Louis XVI and the aunt of Louis-
to have a truly global outlook, writing with equal Philippe, who was to become “Roi des Frangais”
facility about Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity, in 1830. Louise-Henriette died when Bathilde
and Islam, while gravitating, with his later disci- was nine. Three years later, the child was sent
ples, from Muslim to Native American practices. to school at the Convent de la Magdeleine de
With the net thrown so wide, the East-West divi- Trenel where she remained until 1769. It was
sion was irrelevant, and Orientalism no longer there that she began to spend protracted periods
at issue. Instead, it was “Tradition” that had come in prayer and develop the spiritual tendencies
to represent the other realm, exotic and almost that would characterize the rest of her life. In 1770,
unattainable. her father obtained a papal dispensation enabling
her to marry her fourteen-year-old cousin, Louis-
Lit.: Sophia Dobson Collet, The Life and Letters of Henri-Joseph de Bourbon; thus, Bathilde became
Raja Rammohun Roy, 3rd (revised) ed., Calcutta: Sad-
Duchess of Bourbon. In 1772, she gave birth to
haran Brahmo Samaj, 1962 ¢ Ananda K. Coomara-
their only child, Louis-Antoine-Henri de Bourbon, swamy, Selected Papers: Metaphysics, ed. Roger Lipsey,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977 # What is the Duke of Enghien. During this period, her hus-
Civilisation? and Other Essays, Ipswich: Golgonooza band began a series of indiscreet affairs, some
Press, 1989 @ Alain Daniélou, Shiva and Dionysus, with women from Bathilde’s personal entourage.
Rochester, Vt.: Inner Traditions International, 1984 All her attempts to save the marriage failed. The
(orig. French ed. 1979) # Julius Evola, The Doctrine of couple was legally separated at the end of 1780,
Awakening: A Study on the Buddhist Ascesis, London:
and her husband gained sole custody of their son,
Luzac, 1951 (orig. Italian ed. 1943) @ J. Godwin, The
although Bathilde managed to retain the right to Theosophical Enlightenment, Albany, N.Y.: State
University of New York Press, 1994 # René Guénon, see him frequently. After the separation, Bathilde
East and West, London: Luzac, 1941 (orig. French went to live with her father and his second wife,
ed. 1924) @ idem, Man and His Becoming, According Madame de Montesson, in Saint-Assise, but her
to the Vedanta, London: Luzac, 1945 (orig. French father soon gave her two residences of her own —
ed. 1925) ¢ Christmas Humphreys, Both Sides of the the Hotel de Clermont in Paris and a summerhouse
Circle: The Autobiography of Christmas Humphreys,
in Petitbourg. From this time on, her focus was
London: Allen & Unwin, 1978 Christopher Isher-
definitively changed, and she consciously began to wood, Ramakrishna and His Disciples, New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1959 @ Carl T. Jackson, The Orien- forge a new life for herself.
tal Religions and American Thought, Westport, Ct.: The three most important influences on Bathilde
Greenwood Press, 1981 @ Kathleen Raine, India Seen were > Freemasonry, ~ Christian Theosophy and
Afar, Bideford: Green Books, 1990 ¢ Edward Said, + animal magnetism. The participation of women
Orientalism, New York: Vintage Books, 1979 ¢ from the high nobility in “Adoption Freemasonry”
Frithjof Schuon, The Transcendent Unity of Religions,
(so called because of its “adoption”, i.e. accept-
London: Faber & Faber, 1953 (orig. French ed. 1948)
¢ Raymond Schwab, Oriental Renaissance: Europe's ance, of women as members) was common in
Discovery of India and the East, 1680-1880, New this period and Bathilde entered Freemasonry in

--- Page 334 ---
ORLEANS 910
1775 at the latest, joining the Masonic lodge also studied intensely, and produced two original
Saint-Jean de la Candeur (established in 1775) in works, including a book length study based on her
Paris. “Lodges of Adoption” had begun to appear experience of administering a fifteen-month long
in France in the 1740s; their members were there- treatment of animal magnetism to a patient in
fore both men and women, but they were directed Petitbourg, and her Opuscules. The latter contain
by men. Saint-Jean de la Candeur was one of twelve an account of how she was attracted to the life of
Lodges of Adoption in Paris, and the foremost the spirit while young, was later led astray, and
among them in terms of aristocratic recruitment (it how, after her marriage ended, she sought out a
was comprised mostly of people of high nobility). confessor and renewed her interior journey. From
Bathilde was to be more than only one Sister that time on, it is clear that Bathilde conscien-
among others: hardly had she entered Freema- tiously attended to the details of daily life simply
sonry when her brother, the Duke of Orléans, in because she believed them important to her spir-
his capacity (since 1771) of Grand Master of itual well-being. She believed that one always has a
the Grande Loge of France, made her “Grande choice with respect to the quality with which one
Maitresse” of all the French lodges of Adoption. does even ordinary things, writing for example that
Once separated from her husband, she became an ‘...at each moment we breathe and we are able to
active Freemason, and at the same time, began to pump in [pomper] life or death by all the move-
assemble a highly eclectic, sometimes politically ments which constitute our physical, moral and
controversial circle around herself. spiritual being’.
The great Christian theosopher > Louis-Claude In the Introduction she says that on the advice
de Saint-Martin was an important influence as of a ‘wise man’ (possibly Saint-Martin), she ‘aban-
well; his Ecce Homo (1792) was written speci- doned herself to prayer . . . while practicing good
fically for Bathilde. Along with other favorites, works’. In a statement characteristic of her atti-
among them Franz Anton Mesmer and Bacon de la tude, she writes: ‘I received some inner illumination
Chevalerie, he was installed from time to time at and consolation which detached me more and
her chateau in Petitbourg, where her confessor more from all of creation, in order to live only
Pierre Pontard celebrated mass. Saint-Martin was in and for God...this precious pearl... is
an intimate of > Jean-Baptiste Willermoz, who enough .. .’. According to her, it was Providence
practiced mesmerism and was helped in decipher- that had helped her to find the works of Mme.
ing the hieroglyphic messages he allegedly received Guyon, which led her to the ‘heart of my religion’.
from God by Saint-Martin. In striking contrast She regarded ‘all terrestrial nature’ as ‘an open
to Willermoz, however, .Saint-Martin (described book in which we can read the secrets of spiritual
by one contemporary historian as a ‘metaphysical nature’, describes the passage of angelic spirits into
consultant to mesmerists’) sought to spiritualize human beings at the moment of our birth, and
mesmerist principles. He combined them with adopts the Christian theosophical [> Christian
more mystical ideas because he thought mesmer- Theosophy] idea that Adam was originally an
ism too materialistic and liable to make persons androgynous being who was separated into two
vulnerable to what he termed “astral intelli- sexes as a result of original sin. The Opuscules con-
gences”; it is against such “magical” practice that tain an original and carefully elucidated articula-
he wrote Ecce Homo. Bathilde’s closest friend was tion of the difference between the “visible” or
the Baroness d’Oberkirch of Strasbourg, who fre- “teaching” church and the “invisible” or “work-
quented mesmerist groups in Paris. ing” church. It must be noted that the term “inte-
As early as 1789, Bathilde had espoused revolu- rior Church” is never used by Saint-Martin nor by
tionary ideas, along with her brother, Philippe his friends, and first came into use in 1798 through
Egalité, and around that time became involved the publication in French of OQuelques traits de
with two other mystics, Suzette Labrousse and ’Eglise intérieure by > A.V. Lopukhin. Bathilde
Cathérine Théot (the so-called “Mother of God”), may have borrowed it from there. But quite as
who combined > mysticism with political ideals. interestingly, Bathilde does give it a sense very dif-
Bathilde underwrote the publication of Labrousse’s ferent from Lopukhin’s: ‘The visible Church
Journal Prophétique, containing prophecies and is... in my view the schism which broke out since
criticisms of the nobility and the clergy, and edited the Apostles, against the true interior Church
by Pierre Pontard. which is almighty and all pure in the bosom of her
She did a great deal of charitable work; e.g., divine Master’. She writes that she does not have ‘a
in Petitbourg she founded a hospice, where fre- conviction that the visible church of our day, which
quently she personally attended to patients. She is headed by the Pope, would be the same church

--- Page 335 ---
QI OUSPENSKY
that Jesus Christ wanted to establish’. Closely ther study. The great historian Auguste Viatte may
linked to this distinction is the one she makes have been instrumental in creating the impression
between the “teaching church” and the “working of Bathilde as being somewhat naive, almost cer-
church”: the former ‘is visible to the eyes of the tainly neurasthenic, and superficial. His account
body’, whereas the latter is visible ‘to the eyes of the implicitly compares her to the “prudent” Saint-
soul’. She also says that once one ‘possesses the Martin, who warned her against over-involvement
Word in one self’ one is enabled ‘to truly effect with somnambulists and advised her to abandon
divine works’; here again, she shows she is more herself to prayer, Bible reading, and good works.
concerned with what one does than with what While Viatte’s account is valuable inasmuch as she
one says. is otherwise neglected in the literature, delving
Bathilde would not escape the wrath of the deeper into the primary sources indicates she was
Revolution. Her wealth and property were con- more formidable than one might otherwise sur-
fiscated; she was imprisoned in 1793, then released mise. She undeniably deliberately and consciously
in 1795. Relegated to the provinces, she settled in attempted to embody her spiritual convictions, by
Petitbourg, until a decree of exile in 1797, when she trying to make what she said and did in daily life
was banished to Spain. Bathilde refers to a certain correspond to those convictions. Bathilde deserves
Ruffin as one of the guards who escorted her to the a more visible place in the history of theosophy
Spanish border, and writes that during the journey than she presently enjoys.
a great spiritual understanding sprung up between
the two. The identity of this man, whom Bathilde Correspondence entre Mme de Bourbon et M. (Ruffin)
usually addresses as ‘mon bon ange’, has never sur leur expressions religieuses, 2 vols., Barcelona,
been definitively established. Two volumes of her 1812 # The second volume is entitled: Correspondance
voluminous correspondence are devoted to letters entre... Opinions religieuses et divers petits contes
moraux de Madame de Bourbon: Opuscules ou Pen-
sent to him while she was in exile; they were pub-
sées d'une ame de foi sur la religion chrétienne pra-
lished in 1812.
tiquee en esprit et en vérité, n.p., 1812 @ Le
Although Bathilde had been something of an Propagateur du magnétisme animal, n.p., n.d.
accomplished harpist, it would appear that she
Lit.: Janet Mackay Burke, Sociability, Friendship
later came to see > music as a kind of indulgence: and the Enlightenment among Women Freemasons
in one of her letters to Ruffin she strongly advises in Eighteenth-century France, Arizona State Univer-
him to beware of music, because it ‘turns us away sity: unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, 1986 # Ducos
from the pure and saintly source’ and makes us ‘run (Comte-), La mére du Duc d’Enghein, Paris: Plon,
the risk of losing precious time’. In these letters we 1900 ¢ La baronne d’Oberkirch, Mémoires sur la cour
can also read her theosophical interpretations of de Louis XVI et la société francaise avant 1789, Paris:
Gratiot, 1853 # Auguste Viatte, Les sources occultes
the Fall of Lucifer and Adam, her arithmological
du romantisme (Illuminisme -— Théosophie, 1770-
views [~ Number Symbolism], and quotations 1820) (1928), vol. 1, repr. Paris: Champion, 1965, esp.
from various theosophers to be read by Ruffin, e.g. 238-245.
+ Dutoit-Membrini and > William Law. She gives
KAREN-CLAIRE VOSS
Ruffin her opinion about the French Revolution,
which she saw as part of the workings ‘of the great
machine of the universe’, a means for God to save Ouspensky [Uspenskii], Piotr
‘as many people as possible’; and using an almost Dem ’ianovich, * 5.3.1878 Moscow,
alchemical image, she writes that ‘it is God who tT 2.10.1947 London
purifies the water, and who by his action on it
liquefies all the parts’. Unwavering in her view Russian author, spiritual philosopher and teacher
of earthly trials as unimportant in the face of the who is now remembered chiefly for his deeply
heavenly future, she adapted to greatly reduced influential book, In Search of the Miraculous:
circumstances. Her life became more embittered the most authentic account, written by a pupil, of
after her son, the Duke of Enghein (born in 1772), the teaching of > G.I. Gurdjieff. Ouspensky was
had been executed in 1804 upon an order given by born and grew up in Moscow. His mother was a
Napoleon. Finally granted permission by Napo- painter. His father, who died when Ouspensky was
leon to return to France, she went back to Paris in quite young, was a railroad surveyor and also a
1814, where she more or less reconstituted her old mathematician interested in the problems of the
circle. On January 10, 1822, she suffered a stroke fourth dimension, a theme that became one of the
and died later the same day. central elements of Ouspensky’s philosophical and
Bathilde d’Orléans’ life and work is worth fur- spiritual work. Ouspensky seems to have had an

--- Page 336 ---
OUSPENSKY 912
exceptionally vivid sense of himself even at the ings, comprises one of the most serious and origi-
age of two and three and, at the age of six, is said to nal philosophical visions of zoth-century esoteric-
have been reading the works of Lermontoff and ism. By arguing that the central problems of phi-
sensing that there must be something beyond the losophy — such as the questions of the nature of the
world of everyday reality, which he felt was filled self and consciousness, the structure of space and
with ‘absurdity and lies’. He is said not to have time, the meaning of history and the perennial
participated in children’s games. questions of good and evil in human life - cannot
Distrusting all forms of academic science, Ous- be answered in the state of consciousness in which
pensky broke away early from formal scholastic they have been approached in science, philosophy
training with a firm decision never to pass any and conventional religion; and by showing the
examinations and never to take the academic cognitive power of authentically higher states of
degrees for which he was qualified. ‘The profes- consciousness, his writings offer themselves as a
sors’, he wrote, ‘were killing science in the same bridge between esoteric teaching, considered as
way as priests were killing religion’. He studied hidden knowledge accessible only to the few, and
deeply on his own, traveled widely and made his the concrete needs and problems of the human
career as a writer and journalist, being careful to family. His treatment of the idea of higher dimen-
distance himself from all social and political move- sions of time and the idea of eternal recurrence are
ments, including the secret revolutionary parties meant to provide a response to many seemingly
which attracted many members of the Russian unanswerable questions inherent in the opposing
intelligentsia. disciplines of theology, art, science and mainstream
At the age of 29, he discovered the literature of academic philosophy, based as the latter is on the
the > Theosophical Society (> H.P. Blavatsky, > modernist critique of religion and spiritual knowl-
HLS. Olcott, > A. Besant. etc.) and was profoundly edge. The ideas and arguments of Tertium
influenced by the idea of secret wisdom, which Organum are developed, clarified and more widely
gave him a new impulse for the study of religion, > applied in A New Model of the Universe, a collec-
mysticism and “higher dimensions”. In the follow- tion of his essays, published in English in 1930.
ing year, 1908, he traveled to Asia Minor and the Although some of the material in these essays may
Middle East. When he returned to Russia, basing have been revised in the light of Ouspensky’s years
himself in St. Petersburg, he undertook an intensive with Gurdjieff, most of it was originally written
study of occult literature, initiating numerous, before he met Gurdjieff and stands as testimony to
psychological experiments on himself in order to the depth of his own thought and its remarkable
test the ideas he was finding in the books of mysti- resonance to the all-encompassing knowledge that
cism and > magic. These pioneering experiments he discovered in the Gurdjieff teaching.
on consciousness strongly influenced his subse- Ouspensky’s first meeting with Gurdjieff took
quent writings. Throughout his life, Ouspensky place in St. Petersburg in 1915. He had recently
remained scientific and empirical about the inner returned from the Orient and was attracting large
world and could not rest content with speculative audiences to his lectures about his “search for the
metaphysics alone. miraculous” in India, Ceylon, Egypt and elsewhere
The first fruits of his philosophical and experi- (among his listeners was Sophia Grigorievna
ential study of esoteric ideas was a haunting Maximenko, who became his wife and, later, also
novella about eternal recurrence, Strange Life of one of the leading figures in the transmission of the
Ivan Osokin, and his major philosophical work, Gurdjieff teaching in England and America.). At
Tertium Organum, published in St. Petersburg in the urging of some pupils of Gurdjieff who had
1912 and in New York in 1920. Tertium Organum sought him out at his lectures, he reluctantly agreed
became an international best-seller and estab- to meet Gurdjieff. He recognized at once that Gurd-
lished Ouspensky’s worldwide reputation as a jieff had discovered many things for which he had
pre-eminent visionary philosopher. Intended to been looking in vain. ‘I realized’, he wrote, ‘that I
take its place alongside the Organon of Aristotle had met with a completely new system of thought,
and Novum Organum of > Francis Bacon, and surpassing all I knew before’. He began to help
rooted in Ouspensky’s personal experiments in Gurdjieff gather people together to study his ideas
changing states of consciousness, it calls for and and from that moment on, for the rest of his life,
projects a new level of thinking about the funda- the study and practical application of these ideas
mental questions of human existence. Although the remained Ouspensky’s overriding aim.
book is little studied today, Tertium Organum, As the Russian Revolution closed in, Ouspensky
along with Ouspensky’s other philosophical writ- joined the small group of Gurdjieff’s pupils pursu-

--- Page 337 ---
913 PAPUS
ing their study of the teaching under difficult and Lit: Anna Butkovsky-Hewitt, With Gurdjieff in St.
dangerous political conditions. This period of Petersburg and Paris, New York: Weiser, 1978 ¢ Rom
work included the year in Essentuki (1917) in Landau, God is My Adventure: A Book on Modern
Mystics, Masters and Teachers, London: Allen and
which Gurdjieff poured forth the formulations of
Unwin, 1964 ¢ John Pentland, “P.D. Ouspensky”, in:
his ideas about man and the universe with great The Encyclopedia of Religion, New York: Macmillian,
energy and intensity. Ouspensky soon began to 1987, vol. rr @ J.H. Reyner, Ouspensky: The Unsung
feel, however, that a break with Gurdjieff was nec- Genius, London: Allen and Unwin, 1981 @ Merrily E.
essary. Although he had no doubts about the truth Taylor, Remembering Pyotr Denmianovich Ouspen-
of Gurdjieff’s ideas, Ouspensky separated himself sky, New Haven: Yale University Library, 1978 ¢
from him and continued his own work first in James Webb, The Harmonious Circle: The Lives and
Works of G.I. Gurdjieff, P.D. Ouspensky and Their
Constantinople and then settled in London where,
Followers, New York: Putnam’s, 1980 # For more
with the help of Lady Rothermere, A.R. Orage complete bibliographical information consult corre-
and other influential individuals, he lectured and sponding entries in Gurdjieff: An Annotated Bibliogra-
guided the work of numerous pupils until he phy by J. Walter Driscoll and The Gurdjieff Foundation
moved to America during the Second World War. of California (New York, 1985) and Gurdjieff Interna-
The Psychology of Man’s Possible Evolution, pub- tional Review, Vol. 2, No. 2 (www.Gurdijieff.org.). The
latter also contains several useful, brief studies of
lished in English in 1952, contains the lectures
Ouspensky’s ideas and life.
which Ouspensky composed during this period for
the purpose of introducing interested people to the
JACOB NEEDLEMAN
psychological ideas of Gurdjieff. Early in 1947, he
returned to resume his work in London, where he
died later in the same year. Concerning his break Papus (ps. of Gérard-Anaclet-Vincent
with Gurdjieff, Ouspensky writes only that at a Encausse), * 13.7.1865 La Corogne
certain point he ‘ceased to understand him’. John (Spain), f 25.10.1916 Paris
Pentland, a close pupil of Ouspensky, and, later, of
Gurdjieff, and who became a central figure in the His father Louis, a self-taught man originally
transmission of Gurdjieff’s teaching in America, from the South of France, had married a Spanish
poignantly characterized this event: ‘The break woman, Ines Perrez-Vierra, and at the time of
between the two men, teacher and pupil, each of Gérard’s birth was trying to sell a medical appara-
whom had received much from the other, has the tus of his own invention to the physicians of the
elements of a classical tragedy and has never been Basque region: the “Encausse Generator”, a bath
satisfactorily explained. It was not made final until allowing the cutaneous absorption of medica-
1930 when Ouspensky visited Gurdjieff for the last ments. A lack of success impelled Encausse Sr. to
time in Paris’ (Pentland 1987). settle in Paris, near Montmartre, where he was able
to open a clinic in partnership with a certified
Talks with a Devil (1916), New York: Alfred A. Knopf, physician. Gérard was a child with a fertile imagi-
1973 ¢@ Letters from Russia (1919), London: Rout- nation, but mischievous and undisciplined. He was
ledge & Kegan Paul, 1978 ¢ Tertium Organum: The obliged to quit the Rhetoric class of the Collége
Third Canon of Thought. A Key to the Enigmas of the
Rollin, while dreaming of getting even with his
World, 2nd ed., revised (1922), New York: Alfred A.
luckier comrades (he did not earn his baccalaure- Knopf, 1981 « A New Model of the Universe: Princi-
ples of the Psychological Method in Its Application to ate until 1893). He worked towards medical
the Problems ofSctence, Religion and Art (1930), New studies in evening classes, then volunteered for mil-
York: Random House, 1971 ¢ Strange Life of Ivan itary service. It was in 1885 that he discovered the
Osokin (1947), Baltimore: Penguin, 1971 ¢ In Search classics of occultism [- occult/occultism]: Louis
of the Miraculous: Fragments of an Unknown Teach-
Lucas (1816-1863), > Lacuria, > Eliphas Lévi,
ing, New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1949 ¢
and ~ Saint-Yves d’Alveydre; he would consider
The Psychology of Man’s Possible Evolution (1950),
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1974 ¢ A Selection of the latter as one of his masters. Two years later he
transcripts of Ouspensky’s meetings with his pupils published his first article in Lotus, the new review
was published as The Fourth Way: A Record of Talks of the + Theosophical Society in Paris, and was
and Answers to Questions Based on the Teachings of active in the “Isis” Lodge directed by Félix Krishna
G.I. Gurdjieff, New York: Random House, 1971 ¢ Gaboriau, where Papus set out to play a primary
Additional selections of transcripts have been pub-
role. His intrigues led to the closing of the lodge
lished as A Record of Meetings (1992) and A Further
and to the opening of a new branch, “Hermés”, Record: Extracts from Meetings 1928-1945 (1986).
Transcripts of all Ouspensky’s meetings are preserved where he held a more advantageous position.
in the Yale University Library. However, the field of Parisian Theosophy alone did

--- Page 338 ---
PAPUS 914
not suffice to satisfy either his energetic activity or (real name Lucien Mauchel, 1867-1936), com-
his ambition. In 1888 he had founded his own pleted the literary side of the enterprise. Its literary
review, L’Initiation, followed in 1890 by Le Voile soirées attracted the great names of literature inter-
d’Isis, which gave priority to publishing his own ested in the occult, such as Villiers de l’Isle-Adam
lectures and writings. (1838-1889), poets from the cabaret “Le Chat
The creation of a kind of occultist university, the noir”, and Catulle Mendés (1841-1909), who
“Groupe indépendant d’Etudes ésotériques” (Inde- all published in L’Initiation. The best-known
pendent group of esoteric studies, soon renamed occultists of the Belle Epoque, from — Guaita to >
“Ecole Hermétique” [Hermetic school]), marked Péladan, had cherished an ambition for a literary
an important stage in the transformation of career. The remarkable success of the “Papusian”
occultism, hitherto dominated by the personality enterprises, for all their apparent lack of serious-
of Eliphas Lévi, with the entry of societies of ness, is explained by the fact that public opinion
“esoteric character” into the public realm. Beside strongly desired to see scientific legitimacy con-
its lectures for the public, the school offered ferred on speculations of the esoteric type, and
examination-based courses modeled on those of hoped for a harmonization of intellectual life with
official education, comprising a baccalaureate, a the arts and the religious life.
licentiate, and a doctorate — which might cause After resigning from the ~ Theosophical Society
surprise when subjects such as, for example, Kab- in 1891, Papus tried to crown his organizations by
balah [> Jewish Influences], Magic, hypnotism, means of a network of initiatic societies that would
+ magnetism [> Animal Magnetism], and > recruit members in his “schools”. The foundation
alchemy figured on its syllabus, as well as the study of a Supreme Council of the Martinist Order [>
of Sanskrit and Hebrew. Papus set the example by Martinism: Second Period] in the same year gave
publishing, like a new > Pico della Mirandola, in him the opportunity. It was a matter of giving an
fields as various as La kabbale (tradition secréte de institutional framework to an ancient initiation
l’Occident) ... (Kabbalah, secret tradition of the that > Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin had suppos-
West, 1892) or Premiers éléments de lecture de la edly founded, and whose transmission had come
langue sanscrite (First elements of reading the San- down to Papus as early as 1882 through the medi-
scrit language, 1898), even though he was as igno- ation of Henri Delaage (1825-1882), a specialist in
rant of Hebrew as he was of the Indo-European animal magnetism. As the new head of the order,
mother tongue. His best works were devoted Papus tried to justify the legitimacy of his creation
to popular exposition, such as the Traité élémen- in 1899 in a brochure Martinésisme, Willermo-
taire de science occulte . . . (Elementary treatise on sisme, Martinisme et Franc-Maconnerie (Martinez-
occult science, 1888), or his study on > Tarot, the ism, Willermozism, Martinism, and Freemasonry),
following year: Clef absolue des sciences occultes, in which the functioning of his institution was
le tarot des Bohémiens ... (Absolute key to the compared to that of a masonic lodge, in a Christian
occult sciences, the Tarot of the Bohemians). Most ~» Freemasonry that was the heir to the Réau-Croix
of the Parisian occultists taught at the Ecole of > Willermoz, with the grade of “Supérieur
Hermétique: > Sédir, > Barlet, Marc Haven (real Inconnu” (Unknown Superior, S..I..) as the ulti-
name Dr. Emmanuel Lalande, 1868-1926), and mate initiatic degree. The Council contained
the alchemist Francois Jollivet-Castelot (1874- twelve members, including writers as eminent as
1937), while the director and founder particularly Maurice Barrés (1862-1923) and Paul Adam
explored the medical field, devoting about twenty (1862-1920), as well as Papus’s occultist friends
titles to it. Papus had in fact obtained a title of Chamuel, Barlet, Guaita, and Péladan. It devel-
Doctor of Medicine by equivalence during his mil- oped rapidly in Europe, especially in Russia. By
itary service, and had tried to participate in the the time of Papus’s death, 160 lodges existed in the
experiments on hysteria of Dr. Charcot (1825- U.S.A. and Latin America. The setting up of the
1893) in the Salpétriére Hospital, Paris, taking network also made use of Freemasonry. Twice, in
advantage of the closeness of this state to those of 1899 and 1907, Papus had tried without success
trance and hypnosis. There was a strong demand to have himself admitted to the recognized major
for healing among those who frequented occult obediences; instead, he had had to enter via minor-
societies, and who tended to associate bodily ity groups and so-called “fringe” masonry. First
health with spiritual progress; Papus published in of these was the Swedenborgian Rite of > John
1913 his Premiers éléments d’homéopathie pra- Yarker in England, which issued a patent in r901
tique (First elements of practical homeopathy). A for the opening in Paris of the “Inri” Lodge, which,
friend of his, the bookseller and publisher Chamuel thanks to a new patent from Yarker, became the

--- Page 339 ---
915 PARACELSIANISM
Grand Mother Lodge for France in 1906. In Spain, L’absorption cutanée des médicaments d’apres le sys-
the National Rite opened a lodge, “Humanidad”, teme de Louis Encausse, Paris: Chacornac, 1894 ¢ Dr.
still within the framework of organizations con- Papus, Premiers éléments de lecture de la langue san-
trolled by Papus, which then transformed itself scrite, Paris: Carré, 1898 ¢ idem, Martinésisme, Willer-
mosisme, Martinisme et Franc-Maconnerie ..., Paris:
into the Mother Lodge for the Rite of Memphis-
Chacornac, 1899 ¢ idem, Premiers éléments d’homéo-
Misraim, an obedience whose Grand Mastership pathie pratique, Paris: Mystéria, 1913.
Papus occupied from 1908 to 1916.
The exuberant activity of this born organizer Lit.: Philippe Encausse, Sciences occultes ou 25 années
was marked by some rough moments: the trips to d’occultisme occidental: Papus, sa vie, son ceuvre,
Russia at the invitation of the imperial family, in Paris: Ocia, 1949 # Joscelyn Godwin, The Beginnings
of Theosophy in France, London: Theosophical His-
the company of the Lyonnais healer > Anthelme
tory Center, 1989, 23-27 # Marie-Sophie André &
Nizier Philippe, and the Masonic and Spiritualist Christophe Beaufils, Papus, biographie, Paris: Berg
Congress of 1908. The success of Martinism in International, 1995 ¢ Jean-Pierre Laurant, L’Eso-
Russia, where Freemasonry had always been sus- térisme chrétien en France au XIX°® siécle, Lausanne:
pect, facilitated the presentation of the magus to LAge d’Homme, 1992.
the Tsar in 1901 and his activities in Russia during
his visits in 1901, 1905, and 1906. Philippe, whom JEAN-PIERRE LAURANT
Papus considered as his master, had preceded him,
then accompanied him to the court, where his heal- Paracelsianism
ings had a great impact. Meanwhile Papus’s friends
let it be known that the magus’s theurgical opera- Treating Paracelsianism as a set of ideas or as
tions had been responsible for the failure of the an intellectual tradition in some way linked to
1905 revolution; but the presence of the healer, the thinking of > Paracelsus presupposes a non-
whom the French authorities considered a quack, existent conformity of opinion about what those
and Papus’s influence over the imperial family ideas actually are and about the extent to which
caused their departure. The Congress of 1908 Paracelsus himself can be considered the legiti-
involved all the representatives of the esoteric cur- mate author of them. Recent commentators have
rents that Papus had been able to collect around observed the frequency with which Paracelsus
himself in Paris; but his attempt to juxtapose fringe expropriated notions found in earlier authors and
masons, spiritualists, magnetizers, disciples of > have discerned both medieval and Renaissance tra-
Anna Kingsford, and mystics of socialist bent such ditions represented in “Paracelsian” texts. More-
as Albert Jounet (1863-1923) did not work, and over, problems abound in identifying later texts
quarrels proliferated. The Martinist Order had that claim to make use of Paracelsus’s medical, cos-
already nourished rivals in its bosom, such as mological, and chemical ideas with what is actually
Guaita’s Ordre kabbalistique de la Rose Croix and contained in his own writings. Some indeed did
Péladan’s Rose-Croix catholique, while > René invoke Paracelsus as a forerunner, especially in
Guénon, for his part, tried to take power in one of applying chemical principles to medicine and in
its lodges in 1909. Papus’s lack of a firm doctrinal turning away from ancient humoral pathology, but
axis explains the multiplicity of paths followed by it was not necessary to do so since traditions of
him, but his capacity to assimilate and adapt the chemical medicine and even reference to the cos-
philosophical systems of those he admired, from mological tria prima of Sulphur, Salt, and Mercury
Philippe to Saint-Yves d’Alveydre, and to bring existed as well within other contexts, including tra-
them into his synarchic synthesis, endowed him ditional > alchemy as well as ancient and Arabic
with real creativity, producing more than 90 pub- medicine. Already at the beginning of the 17th cen-
lished works. Papus never failed to rebound. Even tury the German physician, chemist and gymna-
his death from exhaustion as an army doctor dur- sium director, Andreas Libavius (c. 1550-1616)
ing World War I was not devoid of panache. was able to make a crucial distinction, distinguish-
ing between the writings of Paracelsus himself and
Papus, Traité élémentaire de science occulte, Paris: those texts composed by a group which he pre-
Carré, 1888 ¢ Dr. G. Encausse, Les Ecoles homéopathi- ferred to label “Neoparacelsians”.
ques, Paris, 1889 Papus, La clef absolue des sciences Discrimination in all the occult disciplines is
occultes, le tarot des bohémiens . . ., Paris: Carré, 1889
important for anyone who would wish to grasp
¢ idem, Le Spiritisme, Librairie du magnétisme, 1890 ¢
the historical meaning of terms. Suitably one histo- idem, La kabbale, tradition secrete de l’occident, Paris:
Carré, 1892 idem, Traité élémentaire de magie rian (Stephen Pumfrey) has taken note of a split
pratique, Paris: Chamuel, 1893 ¢ Dr. G. Encausse, in historical tendencies between those who attach

--- Page 340 ---
PARACELSIANISM 916
the term Paracelsian to a matrix of core doctrines the study of human disciplines like astronomy,
and those who individualize commitments, pre- alchemy, medicine, philosophy, physiognomy, and
ferring qualifications such as “moderate” or “semi- chiromancy, and which, guided by the light of
paracelsian” to designate writers who retain the nature, allowed the doctor to recognize individ-
more practical parts of Paracelsus’s medical/chem- ual illnesses as well as specific cures. In addition,
ical philosophy while eliminating traces of > magic nature also impressed upon things a heavenly
or > mysticism. Yet, even here, an increasing num- power which the magus could pull to himself and
ber of scholars recognize that to separate theory even transfer to the benefit of those whose consti-
and practice, or to label all those as Paracelsians tutions were weak or who had fallen ill.
who align chemistry with medicine, is to build the Two works of the German physician Oswald
foundations of a definition upon historical quick- Croll (ca. 1560-1609), the “admonitory preface”
sand. Samuel Johnson noted that the writers of to his Basilica Chymica (1609) and a sometimes
dictionaries were required ‘to remove rubbish. . . accompanying treatise on the doctrine of signs,
from the paths of learning’, and with this in mind it reflect especially well aspects of the magical uni-
is important to acknowledge that, apart from being verse linked to Paracelsus. Even though the two
a category of historical convenience, Paracelsian- tracts no longer escorted later editions of the Basil-
ism possessed a local meaning that was intended as ica, observers like Libavius remained mindful of
a term of abuse. According to this meaning, the their magical presence. Indeed, a review of the
label “Paracelsian” functioned to describe a cate- preface to Croll’s book unlocked for Libavius
gory of otherness — one that was forged by antago- several features of Croll’s magical thinking which
nists anxious about the loss of control over he considered intertwined with Paracelsian philos-
traditional intellectual and linguistic standards, ophy and epistemologically dangerous. According
particularly in medicine and philosophy, and who to Croll, one could not learn medicine simply by
feared the dismantling of trusted coordinates of reading books since only nature could truly
knowledge. Paracelsianism, in this sense, repre- instruct the physician. In that regard, it was neces-
sented a subversive natural philosophy and med- sary for the physician to know the internal, invisi-
ical cosmology in which the human being, viewed ble or astral structures of things in the greater
as a condensation of the macrocosmos, could world and to understand how these related to the
both know and operate upon the natural world organization of the body. Intellectual discovery fol-
by recognizing the signatures and > correspon- lowed thus not by interpreting the books of human
dences of creation. The result was a view of nature hands, nor from accumulated experience or struc-
alive with magical forces and a therapeutic sys- tured reasoning, but in reading the “book” of
tem dependent upon their use. Each individual, nature and by experiencing the divine. If, however,
Paracelsus thought, comprised within him/her- personal inspiration satisfied for cognitive innova-
self all existence. Each was a synthesis of physical tion, Libavius wondered, how could one avoid a
body, immortal soul, and sidereal, or astral spirit. multitude of opinions being expressed as a result of
For some “Paracelsians” such an arrangement personal fantasy. “Take away teachers and books,
meant that the powers and virtues operating in the and allow anyone to philosophize on his own [and]
world at large were also at work within the human you will have a lovely philosophy indeed’. Paracel-
body. These were vital forces, penetrating each sianism, from this point of view, meant something
thing in nature and making them part of a univer- diabolical. ‘This very thing moreover is one of the
sal living structure. To practice medicine one had, devil’s enterprises, so that he may either abolish or
therefore, to comprehend the structure and opera- pervert every system of learning, and he himself
tions of the greater world in order to understand may rule at his own pleasure’. All this was enough
the vital functions of the body. Paracelsianism, for Libavius to place “Paracelsians” into the ranks
then, stood for a specific type of cognition viewed of ‘Pyrrhonists, Sceptics, Heraclitus, Plato and
by some as part of the larger episteme of magic and their like’, who considered that man was the meas-
the occult [> occult/occultism]. ure of everything.
Paracelsus considered nature as Magierin and Thus Paracelsianism, like early Platonism, and
also thought of the human being as Magier, or other mystical strategies which coalesced realms
“magus”. Thus philosophical experience worked of matter, spirit, and soul into a single divine unity,
in harmony with nature. On the one hand, nature became yet another magical tradition which rei-
broadcast her secret messages in signs which the fied the figurative and transmuted analogies into
magician/physician could learn to read through expressions of identity. Like them, it blended spirit

--- Page 341 ---
917 PARACELSIANISM
and matter, mixing the sacred and the profane. For magic — not the natural sort, but the type linked to
Aristotelians there was certainly much to complain the black arts, necromancy, vain ~ astrology,
about, not the least being the disarray brought geomancy, and the art of signs.
by the medley of spiritual, magical, and empirical Native meaning, as far as Paracelsianism was
conviction to the long standing symmetry of concerned, was largely constructed of contemptu-
traditional disciplines. Accordingly Paracelsianism ous components. According to Libavius, to want to
commanded a strange place in the intellectual geo- be a Paracelsian was 1) to want to injure all the
graphy of the 16th and 17th centuries. It came arts, 2) to despise all the ancients and moderns, 3)
into existence as a new, and dangerous continent, to force upon people promises for a long life and
reports of which drew attention to native habits for curing incurable diseases, 4) to cure by chance
which ignored Aristotelian customs and confused or, if by art, in no other way than that of Galenic
theological, natural philosophical, metaphysical, doctors, 5) to recommend magic along with kab-
and empirical approaches to knowledge — all of balah [+ Jewish Influences] and to practice magic
which posed a presumed threat to other knowl- through the methods of signs, words, and charac-
edge habitats and to their established religious and ters, 6) to attack Galen’s medicine with reproach,
political hierarchies. 7) to declare oneself the monarch of arcana and
The problem was that, especially upon the globe medicine, and 8) to make oneself an accomplice in
of medicine, the inhabitants of the land of Para- shameful deeds. “Paracelsian”, like “Anabaptist”,
celsus, i.e. those who were supposed to practice was a useful category of condemnation — so useful
Paracelsianism, were often reported as having been that even Libavius himself was accused of Paracel-
seen in other locations. Libavius, tried to deal with sian enthusiasm, in this case because he advocated
the problem by constructing a new cartography separating pure from impure in making chemical
drawing lines around different areas of medical medicines. But simply commending efficacious
custom and commitment. Boundaries were easy to essences separated from useless dregs did not,
draw around those who followed the teachings of Libavius noted, make one a Paracelsian. If it did, he
Hippocrates and Galen. These he called dogma- explained, one would have to include Avicenna,
tists. Only slightly less precise were the lines delin- Bulcasis, and even some of the doctors at the arch-
eating a realm of “chymiatrists”, i.e. those who Galenic school of medicine in Paris within that
added to ancient method chemical pharmaceuticals company.
prepared by means of alchemy. Here had resided The continent of chymiatria may have drifted
earlier figures like > Avicenna, Mesue, Rhases, and apart from the region of Paracelsianism on Libav-
Bulcasis, who were followed by more recent inhab- ius’s globe, but at the University of Paris many con-
itants, among them Albert, Arnold, > Llull, and tinued to think that the two were inseparable.
Ulstadius. There were troubles in the land of the Foremost among them was the Galenist physician
chymiatrists, however, that required, out of regard and censor of the medical faculty, Jean Riolan (the
for ethnic sensitivity, new lines to be drawn and elder) (1539-1606). Riolan’s vision countenanced
new names to be created. For some chymiatrists a narrow horizon. For him, even chymiatria was
had accommodated the chemical discipline to unnecessary to good medicine. Nevertheless, he
ancient teachings in such a way as to disclose permitted freedom of choice for those who were
Galenic principles in terms of chemistry or by ref- curious about chemical remedies and zealous for
erence to the macrocosm. These were to be called novelty, just as long as such physicians made use of
“parabolici” and “hermetici”, or even “natural pharmacists to prepare their new medicines. New
chymiatri”. But there were others whom Libavius remedies, in themselves, did not require an altered
labeled “sophistici” who had long mixed sophistic medical philosophy. However Riolan saw in Para-
opinion with Hippocratic references and who celsianism, aside from philosophical chaos, a
thereby had occasioned much disorder throughout threat to established social roles. At Paris, surgery
the map. The third empire was that of the Paracel- and pharmacy were arts subaltern to the “science”
sians. However, this too needed to be divided into of medicine. If a doctor came by an arcane remedy,
two parts. For, he says, when novelty became pleas- preparing the medicine at home did not detract
ing it enticed the soul to very strange habits so that from medical decorum. But his house, Riolan
some began to embrace impious magic. Some noted, should never become a pharmacopolium
rejected alchemy. All rejected Aristotle and Plato where remedies were sold. Social and physical dis-
while replacing these with a type of philosophy that tance from prepared medicines was, after all, what
Paracelsus called “sagax” and which embraced protected those who prescribed them. The point is

--- Page 342 ---
PARACELSIANISM 918
that, for Riolan, one element of the definition of therius von Andernach (ca. 1497-1574) and the
Paracelsianism was social. Reversing professional Danish university professor, natural philosopher,
tradition, Paracelsian physicians, he determined, and physician, Petrus Severinus (1540-1602). Sev-
made medicines themselves and sold these medica- erinus’s text, the Idea Medicinae (1571), sought
ments from their own shops. to place itself within the scholarly tradition of
Something that might be called Paracelsian- learned medicine by connecting the doctrines of
ism, then, involved the perception of a break with Paracelsus with those of Hippocrates and Galen.
the social, textual, educational and linguistic med- There emerged a more systematic and less eccen-
ical continuum. Libavius himself noted that after tric presentation of Paracelsian notions which
claiming for himself the monarchy of chemistry, succeeded so well in altering the complexion of
Paracelsus had decreed that he should found a new Paracelsus that even the well known anti-Paracel-
alchemy as well as a new medicine. In doing so, sian physician and theologian Thomas Erastus
however, he opened doors to fashioning cures by all (1524-1583), could commend the text to his read-
sorts of methods and to proclaiming all manner of ers. In Severinus’s hands Paracelsianism became
chemical and medical arcana. In this case, Paracel- eclectic and more obviously neoplatonic, and it was
sianism became coupled with an enthusiasm for this sort of interpretation that affected the thinking
novelty, and once again Libavius observed that it of other notable Paracelsians such as the professor
had thus come about that hardly anyone agreed of medicine at Basle, Theodore Zwinger, and the
with anyone else, each person wishing to bring English physician, Thomas Moffett (1553-1604).
forth something new. By this reasoning Paracel- For his part, Andernach emphasized a more
sianism meant intellectual fraud since it allowed a practical approach to Paracelsian therapeutics. As
person to agree with no one, while, at the same a prominent medical humanist, a translator of
time, granting him license to contradict everyone Galen, and, with experience as a professor of med-
else and to condemn all the writings, sayings, and icine at Paris, he prepared, in 1571, an enormous
deeds of others. text concerning the old and new medicine strongly
Intellectual novelty, of course, occasioned a wide supportive of chemical medicines. In other places
variety of sometimes contrasting opinions. Those he argued that the chemical principles Sulphur,
who might willingly have been attracted to a Salt, and Mercury could be considered to differ
Paracelsian camp comprised a diverse group and only slightly from ancient elements and judged that
attitudes varied not only over the years but also chemical procedures could transform poisonous
from region to region. Reactions also differed in matter into wholesome substances. A further
Germany, England, France, Italy, and other places impulse toward Paracelsian and chemical medi-
depending upon local medical traditions, religious cines came about as a result of a famous com-
histories, institutional authorities, and the profes- mentary on the works of Dioscorides written by
sional rights and privileges demanded by doctors Pietro Andrea Matthioli (1500-1577). The text
and apothecaries. Such diversity produced what was published in Latin in 1544 and a French trans-
has been called paracelsismes particuliers, and pay- lation appeared in 1561. The book included refer-
ing attention to such particular expressions of ence to the use of stones, minerals, and metals,
Paracelsianism is the most judicious way to gain and explained how antimony, which had been
insight into the local meanings of the term itself. described by Paracelsus, could be rendered into an
Early editors of Paracelsus’s works helped estab- effective purgative. At Paris the debate over the
lish particular flavors for Paracelsian ideas. The internal use of antimony inspired attacks upon sus-
published collections of Johann Huser (c. 1545- pected followers of Paracelsus, and the fear of clan-
c. 1600) and Michael Toxites (c. 1515-1581) fueled destine support for Paracelsian ideas within the
early Paracelsian fervor by combining elements university there led to the prompt condemnation
of medical reform with what Joachim Telle has of an early advocate of antimony, Roch le Baillif
called “transconfessional theo-alchemy”. > Gérard (fl. 1578-1580). It also opened up further debate
Dorn’s (c. 1530-1584) edition of Paracelsian texts about the rights of physicians who were not edu-
went further and more firmly established Paracel- cated at Paris to practice in the city.
sus within the cultural context of medieval and Just as Paracelsianism represented for some a
Renaissance alchemical writers. In France, Paracel- radical break with medical authority, it stood for
sian medical philosophy appeared as a result of others as an attack upon the intellectual jurisdic-
new texts and old wars. The texts were those of tion of Aristotelian philosophy, and especially Aris-
two institutional figures, the translator of Galen totelian logic. The logical reforms of Peter Ramus
and teacher of Andreas Vesalius, Johannes Guin- (1515-1572) sometimes cohabited with Paracel-

--- Page 343 ---
919 PARACELSIANISM
sian medical philosophy. In his Basilea, an oration quarter century before the debate about his books
addressed to the city of Basel in 1570, Ramus began at Paris. In answer to Jacques Aubert in a
exclaimed that ‘this man [Paracelsus] has forced debate about chemical medicines and the origins of
his way so deeply into the innermost parts of metals, Duchesne admitted that the ignorance and
nature .. . that one could say that with Theophras- faults of some had caused the “chymici” to fall into
tus medicine has been born for the first time and is disrepute, but that this was no reason to condemn
perfected’. In Ramus, logic combined with politics the entire art by which God had revealed so many
and religion and, as the chemical physicians of secrets of nature and so many preparations of
Henri IV and Louis XIII would later demonstrate, herbs, animals and minerals. As concerned Paracel-
Paracelsianism, in the guise of practical chemical/ sus, Duchesne did not propose to acknowledge his
medical procedures, would find a source of both “patronage of theology” and neither did he agree
social legitimation and financial encouragement with him in all other matters. Nevertheless, he con-
within the political institutions of Europe, particu- fessed, ‘I dare to say and uphold that that man
larly within the patronage systems linked to royal, teaches many things pertaining to medicine almost
imperial, and princely courts. divinely, which a grateful posterity can never
Paracelsus was certainly a leading social, polit- sufficiently praise and admire’. Much of the dispute
ical, and religious dissident. Paracelsianism, with Aubert centered on a defense of Aristotle’s
however, became in part associated with aristo- explanation of the origins of metals against
cratic circles. Paracelsian physicians gained court Aubert’s criticisms; but it also involved Duchesne
appointments and the publication of Paracelsian in a defense of alchemy and, more specifically, in an
texts was made possible in large part by means of apology for metallic transmutation.
court patronage. One of the first publishers of Duchesne’s Paracelsianism would be attacked
Paracelsus’s works, Adam von Bodenstein, was and defended at Paris and a good indication of the
court physician to the German Duke of Neuburg, confusion surrounding the issue of definition can
who later became Elector of the Palatinate, be found in the fact that Libavius, who wished to
Ottheinrich. The early definitive collection of Para- defend the place of alchemy in medicine, ultimately
celsus’s medical and natural philosophical texts joined the debate as a Duchesne supporter. Regard-
brought together by Johann Huser and Paul Link less of how the intervention was seen by others,
began to appear at Basle in 1589 with the financial especially by Riolan who viewed the intrusion as a
support of the Archbishop of Cologne. Libavius sign that Libavius had joined the Paracelsian fac-
noticed the court connection and asked at one tion, Libavius remained no friend of Paracelsus. He
point, ‘If you are real doctors and do not flee from could, however, stand with other chemical physi-
the light [of wisdom], why do you not teach in the cians at Paris, and commented about another par-
academies? You are occupied at courts where I ticipant in the dispute, the Paracelsian Turquet de
believe you accomplish more by flattery than by la Mayerne, that Mayerne’s dignity, like his own,
speaking the truth, and advance more by begging was preserved, not by defending Duchesne, but by
than by curing’. In France the political success of the sweat rendered in combining Hippocratic and
Huguenot aspirations at the end of a long period chemical medicine and in picking out good reme-
of civil war contributed to a more open, and court dies from Paracelsus’s manure.
supported, Paracelsian presence. Le Baillif was Medical chemists need not have been Paracel-
himself a physician in ordinary to the French king sians, unless, of course, it was convenient for their
Henri III, but other chemical physicians admit- enemies to label them as such. In the case of
ting various aspects of a Paracelsian medical phi- another medical doctor named Nicolas Abraham
losophy appeared in Paris several years later, de la Framboisier, the medical faculty at Paris dur-
arriving there in the company, and with the pro- ing the reign of Louis XIII seems to have worried
tection, of the Huguenot turned Catholic, Henry about Paracelsian leanings even though the physi-
of Navarre. Prominent among this new medi- cian himself rejected ‘the sect of Paracelsus’ and
cal entourage were Jean Ribit (ca. 1571-1605), argued that he had derived all his chemical reme-
Theodore Turquet de la Mayerne (1573-1655), dies from Galen and Hippocrates. Here the multi-
and Joseph Duchesne (ca. 1544-1609), also called dimensionality of Paracelsianism gave credence
Quercetanus. Although each stirred controversy in to the barest suspicion. Since Paracelsians were
his own right, the writings of Duchesne, which aligned with Protestantism in France, the faculty of
expressed a particular variety of Paracelsian think- medicine was alert to the strategy which officially
ing, ushered in an intense period of debate. rejected Paracelsus, no matter what one’s private
Duchesne’s positions were well known for over a beliefs, while seeking advancement and favor from

--- Page 344 ---
PARACELSIANISM 920
royal and ecclesiastical patrons. Definition became Paracelsian legacy. As early as the 1570s Weigel, the
clouded by uncertainty as intellectual priorities pastor of Zschopau in east Saxony, had composed
themselves were obscured by the social and politi- treatises and sermons whose content could by no
cal facts of life. means be considered reflective of either Catholic or
Despite the problems in France, Duchesne and main line Protestant opinion. In the early 17th cen-
other French Paracelsians continued to play impor- tury several publishers busied themselves with the
tant roles in the interpretation and transmission printing of “Weigelian” books. Some, however,
of Paracelsianism. After leaving France Mayerne were not actually written by Weigel and sorting out
became chief physician to the English king, James I. the genuine from the possibly apocryphal has
Elsewhere in England, John Hester (+ 1593) trans- become a primary task of Weigelian scholars ever
lated the tracts of Duchesne as well as others, pro- since. Of those texts linked to Weigel, influences
moting chemical preparations included in works by stemming from medieval mystical traditions and,
the Italian physician Leonardo Fioravanti (1518- after 1578, from Paracelsian natural philosophy
1588) and the German Philip Herman. Another predominated. Other “Weigelian” books had a
Englishman, a minister named Thomas Tymme more apocalyptic message, insisted upon inward
(+ 1620) also translated large sections of Duchesne’s knowledge, and conflated Paracelsus, kabbalah,
works, especially his discussions of Paracelsian cos- and magic. Institutionalized Protestantism needed
mology, into English. Tymme, like R. Bostock, who to make no distinction concerning authorship. It
defended Paracelsian principles and the macro- viewed all the writings as depending upon a theol-
cosm-microcosm analogy in a work of 1585, drew ogy of the inner word well situated to the subjective
something spiritual from Paracelsus’s works and epistemologies of religious radicals.
found there as well an anthropology and natural In Paracelsus, Weigel seems to have encountered
philosophy removed from, and consequently not such notions as the light of nature and the light of
indebted to, ancient, heathen texts. grace and to have used them when fashioning his
Depending upon one’s point of intellectual ori- own apprehension of the process of human under-
gin, Paracelsianism might mean chemical philoso- standing. He also found in Paracelsus ideas of man
phy or even practical chemical medicine. However, as microcosm, produced from limus terrae, and
another reading of Paracelsus, especially based depicted as the quinta essentia of creation. By con-
upon Paracelsus’s theological writings, inspired a trasting a heavenly flesh, which is eternal, to an
far more mystical definition. This interpretation earthly mortal flesh, Weigel judged that the flesh of
was especially convenient to religious radicals like Christ was not that of Adam. The flesh of Christ,
+ Valentin Weigel (1533-1588) and his pseudo- therefore, was not from the earth, not from the seed
Weigelian imitators, as well as the early Rosicru- of man, but from heaven. Christ had a heavenly
cian enthusiast > Adam Haslmayr. To Haslmayr, body born of Mary, a heavenly Eve. In Paracelsus’s
Rosencreutz and Paracelsus both had promised text Liber de Sancta Trinitate, which seems to
evangelical freedom to a future world and Hasl- have had an active life in manuscript, Paracelsus
mayr proclaimed accordingly a new religion, the described how God was originally alone and with-
Theophrastia Sancta, viewed as a kind of perennial out any beginning. Thus the divine separation into
religion practiced in occult circles until Paracelsus three persons was not eternal, and initially there
had publically proclaimed its meaning. The basis was only one being, one divinity, one person. God
of the religion was the tria cabalistica prima, the remained alone until he wished to multiply and
three cabalistic principles of Bitten, Suchen, und manifest himself, at which point there came into
Anklopfen [asking, seeking, and appealing] which being three persons, three beings, three qualities
Paracelsus had designated in the Philosophia Sagax and forms, all the while remaining, nonetheless,
as the means to all natural knowledge. The living one God, one creator. Paracelsus also described
word of God sealed within the human being was, how God separated a female form from himself,
on the basis of this theology, far more important represented as a himmilische weib or frau gottes,
that what was written in Scripture. In fact, without which was understood not as a separate divinity,
the human spirit to enliven them, the Bible itself but through whom God the Father produced the
was merely a collection of dead letters. To the second person of the trinity. Embedded here, as
external trappings of Christendom some advocated well as in the Christologies of other religious writ-
a renewed “church of the spirit”, and it is just such ers like Melchior Hofmann (f 1543) and Caspar
a view of the real church which brokered between Schwenkfeld (t+ 1561), was a revolutionary and
Weigel and Paracelsus a theological alliance. millennial conception of the church. By distancing
The story of “Weigelian” theology is, in part, a Christ’s flesh from human flesh, Weigel joined

--- Page 345 ---
921 PARACELSIANISM
those who cast into doubt the possibility of reform- ing thereby the ancient doctrine of humors, but
ing the old Adam. There had to be a new covenant annexed Paracelsian notions to explications of
in which the heart would replace the external physiological processes in the idiom of chemistry.
Jerusalem as the dwelling place of God. To this end, This aspect of what later became known as iatro-
Weigel recognized three stages of the world ending chemisty developed especially in the 17th century
finally in the age of the Holy Spirit. ‘{Then] the in the writings of > Joan Baptista van Helmont
outer will be brought into the inner. Man himself (1579-1644), Franciscus de le Boé Sylvius (1614-
will be Jerusalem and the temple in which God 1672), Raymond Vieussens (ca. 1635-1715) and
dwells. Then one will have no need for ordained many others. Expressing a natural philosophy in
preachers or other teachers . . .’ Such thinking was terms of vitalism and macrocosmic influences, and
dangerous. At Marburg, in 1619, two teachers in upholding chemical analogies related to the human
the city’s paedagogium named Homagius and Zim- being inevitably involved reference to Paracelsus,
mermann, inspired in part by Weigel and Paracel- however. Many alchemical texts as well continued
sus’s book concerning the trinity, tossed from their to enlist Paracelsus, and the tria prima, as influen-
windows shredded copies of Greek and Latin /ex- tial antecedents to discussions of transmutation. In
ica (among other books) claiming that one should large part, however, Paracelsus lent himself to mys-
also throw out academic degrees, logic, and the arts tical cosmologies as one member of a lineage of
as well. No one, they contended, should any longer magical savants aware of inner relationships and
study Latin, but everyone should read the writings forever maneuvering between matter, spirit, and
of Weigel and Paracelsus (Theophrastus). These soul. The religious mystic and Philosophus Teu-
authors had provided the key to scripture. And tonicus, ~ Jacob Boehme (1575-1624), combined
what was this key? It was that all of scripture was Neoplatonic and Paracelsian themes in numerous
to be understood allegorically, and that the word of prophetic and mystical writings. Currents of >
God was not to be found strictly in the Bible, but Christian theosophy and > Naturphilosophie car-
was to be derived from an inner spirit, an internal ried both Paracelsus and Boehme along for years
light. The Bible contained only “dead letters” thereafter. Both were influential in shaping the
which could only be comprehended through reve- theistic philosophy of > Franz von Baader (1765-
lation. Thus, they believed, all those were repug- 1841), who sought to combine realms of matter
nant who attempted to blow into such dead letters and spirit in opposition to strictly mechanical
a living soul and who therefore only ended up explanations of nature, and to post-Romantic
believing what they wanted to believe. writers like the poet-alchemist Alexander von
Paracelsianism could be aligned with spiritual- Bernus (1880-1965), who insisted upon a spiritual
ists like Schwenckfeld and Weigel, but it also has dimension within the natural sciences, and >
been shown to have been appealing to some taking Rudolf Steiner (1861-1925), who continued to
part in the more orthodox theological debates describe the threefold nature of the human being in
surrounding the symbolic interpretation of the terms of body, soul, and spirit.
Eucharist. Views of Paracelsus in this regard seem
Lit.: Hugh Trevor-Roper, “The Paracelsian Move-
linked to the Swiss reformation, especially to the
ment”, in: Renaissance Essays, Chicago: University of
thought of reformers like Bucer, Zwingli, and Chicago Press, 1985, 149-199 @ Allen Debus, The
Oecolampadius. In this variety of Paracelsianism, English Paracelsians, New York: F. Watts, 1965 ¢
it has been argued, Paracelsus became a kind of idem, The Chemical Philosophy: Paracelsian Science
“Christian Magus” developing a knowledge of and Medicine in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Cen-
God through the study of nature, or as a combina- turies, New York: Science History Publications, 1977
tion of natural philosopher and religious thinker, ¢ idem, The French Paracelsians: The Chemical Chal-
lenge to Medical and Scientific Tradition in Early Mod-
gaining special revelation through grace. Neverthe-
ern France, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
less, Paracelsianism was never officially part of any 1991 @ Giancarlo Zanier, “La Medicina Paracelsiana
reformation religion, but existed there, as in many in Italia: Aspetti di un’accoglienza particolare”, Rivista
other contexts, as a part of the heritage of neopla- di storia della filosofia 4 (1985), 627-653 ¢ Jole
tonic and mystical Renaissance philosophy. Shakelford, “Paracelsianism and Patronage in Early
Aside from making chemistry relevant to medi- Modern Denmark”, in: Bruce T. Moran (ed.), Patron-
age and Institutions, Rochester: Boydell, 1991, 85-110
cine, other themes, philosophical, mystical, and
¢ Major contributions to the subject by Stephen Pum-
religious, connected later writers to the works and frey, Ole Grell, Carlos Gilly, Didier Kahn, Stephen
thoughts of Paracelsus. One tradition connected Bamforth, Joachim Telle, Heinz Schott, Gundolf Keil,
Paracelsus not only to an explanation of disease Wolf-Dieter Miuller-Jahncke, Kurt Goldammer, Ute
as specific entities with specific etiologies, reject- Gause, and Wilhelm Kuhlmann may be found among

--- Page 346 ---
PARACELSIANISM 922
the individual articles in the following collections: Acta by a patient’s complaint of excessive fees, led to his
Paracelsica, Munchen, 1930-1932 ¢ Brian Vickers flight from Basle at the beginning of 1528. After
(ed.), Occult and Scientific Mentalities in the Renais- brief residence in Colmar and Esslingen he lived
sance, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984
in Nuremberg for a short period. Documentary
¢ Joachim Telle (ed.), Parerga Paracelsica: Paracelsus
sources place him at Beratzhausen in 1530, at in Vergangenheit und Gegenwart, Stuttgart: Franz
Steiner Verlag, 1991 Roland Edighoffer et al. (eds.), St. Gallen in 1531, and after numerous further
Paracelse et les siens (ARIES 19), Paris: La Table stations he reached Augsburg in 1536, but even
d’Emeraude, 1995 # Volker Zimmermann (ed.), Para- here he stayed only a while. In 1537 he travelled
celsus: Das Werk — die Rezeption, Stuttgart: Franz to Mahrisch Kromau to treat Johann von Leipa,
Steiner Verlag, 1995 Ole Peter Grell (ed.), Paracelsus: the hereditary Marshal of Bohemia, and was also
The Man, his Reputation, His Ideas and Their Trans-
resident at Vienna the same year. In 1538 he was
formation, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1998 # Heinz Schott and
briefly in Villach and St. Veit. Relatively little is Ilana Zinguer (eds.), Paracelsus und seine interna-
tionale Rezeption in der friithen Neuzeit: Beitrage zur known about Paracelsus in 1539-1540, but he was
Geschichte des Paracelsus, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1998 ¢ in Salzburg in 1541. Severely ill, Paracelsus wrote
Allen Debus and Michael Walton (eds.), Reading the his will on 21.9.1541 and died three days later.
Book ofNature: The Other Side ofthe Scientific Revo-
lution, Kirksville: Sixteenth Century Journal Publishers,
2. MEDICAL WRITINGS
1998 # Wilhelm Kuhlmann and Joachim Telle (eds.),
Paracelsus left an extensive opus. An initial
Der Friihparacelsismus (Corpus Paracelsisticum, 1),
Tubingen: Max Niemeyer, 2001. observation concerning his most important med-
ical works, is that the early writings raise special
problems. It may be assumed that he composed
BRUCE T. MORAN
medical works even before his Basle period. Yet
all medical works usually classified as “early”
Paracelsus (ps. of Theophrastus Bombast works (all unpublished during his life) cannot be
von Hohenheim), *1493 or 1494 dated with any certainty. A precise chronological
Einsiedeln, + 24.9.1541 Salzburg ordering, attempted by Karl Sudhoff in prepar-
ing his standard edition (and since widespread),
1. LIFE 2. MEDICAL WORKS such as “Works c. 1520” or “Works c. 1525/26”,
3. ASTRONOMICAL AND DIVINATORY is unsupported. The book called “Archidoxis”
Works 4. THEOLOGY 5. MaGic belong to those writings which can be attributed to
his pre-Basle period. This is Paracelsus’s major
1. LIFE “alchemical”, i.e. pharmaceutical-chemical text.
Paracelsus was the son of the physician Wilhelm Here he presents a medically applied > alchemy,
Bombast von Hohenheim and an unnamed bonds- whose goal is the separation of the pure from the
woman of Einsiedeln Abbey in Switzerland. The impure chiefly through methods of distillation. It
meaning of the name “Paracelsus”, first attributed also treats of “chemical” remedies derived from
in the 1520s, is not certain, but could have arisen metals and minerals (e.g. quintessences, arcana,
through the Latinisation of “Hohenheim”; the magisteria, elixirs) associated later on with the
sense of “beyond or surpassing Celsus” is unlikely. name of Paracelsus. It is evident that Paracelsus
About 1502 Paracelsus moved with his father to knew the pertinent late medieval alchemical works
Villach (Carinthia). Little is known about his of > Ramon Llull, > Arnau de Vilanova and espe-
schooldays or studies. According to his own state- cially John de Rupescissa [> Jean de Rocquetail-
ment, he took his doctorate in medicine at Ferrara lade]. However, it is also clear that he did not
(c. 1515). He then made his “great peregrination” identify himself with their tradition (nor the aca-
through Europe in the capacity of field surgeon. In demic medicine based on ancient authorities).
1524/25 Paracelsus can be traced at Salzburg. In Many of Paracelsus’s recipes in this work were
1525 he was involved in the Peasants’ War. His role almost incomprehensible for the reader, partly due
is unclear but he had to flee the city. On 5.12.1526 to deliberate blinds and partly due to careless pre-
he registered as a resident in Strasbourg and evi- sentation. This question needs closer examination,
dently wished to settle here. In March 1527 he was as the so-called Volumen Paramirum (not to be
appointed town physician and university lecturer confused with Opus Paramirum c. 1530) is also
at Basle. He caused a sensation by lecturing in Ger- regarded as an “early” writing. In this text, five
man as well as Latin and attacked the ancient med- causes of disease are described (Ens astrale, Ens
ical authorities. Disputes with the medical faculty, venenale, Ens naturale, Ens spiritale and Ens
apothecaries, and the Town Council, compounded deale), an obvious deviation from the ancient

--- Page 347 ---
923 PARACELSUS
medicine of Hippocrates or Galen. The so-called Devil, man could also work curses through
Treatise on Miner’s Disease also probably dates “belief”. Some remarks show that Paracelsus
from this period. Here the various occupational assumed the existence of witches. He treated this
diseases of the miners are described, explicitly topic more extensively in Philosophia de divinis
stating that the ancient authors do not mention operibus et factis, which was probably written
these diseases. All works mentioned so far between 1529 and 1532, and where he distin-
remained unprinted during Paracelsus’s lifetime. guished between the marks and works of witches
Paracelsus’s first published medical text did not |-> Witchcraft]. Witches who have not yet commit-
appear until 1529, a work on syphilis, Vom Holtz ted evil deeds can still be cured through Christian
Guaiaco grtindlicher heylung. Here Paracelsus remedies such as prayer and fasting. Paracelsus
objected to the uncritical use of guaiac wood, a gave no indication of the procedure against witches
contemporary wonder-cure. In 1530 (possibly deemed to be active by their community. It may be
even in 1529) a further syphilis text appeared assumed that he would have supported drastic
Von der Frantzosischen kranckheyt Drey Biicher measures including the death penalty in such cases.
at Nuremberg. In 1530 Paracelsus was working In 1535 Paracelsus’s balneological text, Vonn dem
at Beratzhausen on Opus Paragranum. Here he Bad Pfeffers...Tugenden (The Virtues of Bad
introduced the pillars of his new medicine: Pfaffers) was published, followed in 1536 by his
Philosophia; Astronomia; Alchimia and - last but Grosse Wundartzney (Great Book of Wound-
not least — the Virtue of the physician (Proprietas Surgery), in which Paracelsus expounded internal
or Virtus). In 1531 Paracelsus wrote his Opus diseases rather than surgical principles. Here
Paramirum comprising four books at St. Gallen. Paracelsus also touched on the doctrine of signa-
In its first book Paracelsus dealt with the Tria tures, which is often associated with his name.
prima of Mercury, Sulphur und Salt, the three fun- Many passages contain instructions for “magical”
damental Principles, which constitute all bodies, remedies, so that it is not entirely incomprehensible
including the human being. Paracelsus explained that Paracelsus was suspected of sorcery in his own
the Tria prima by comparison with a burning piece lifetime. His Astronomia Magna (c. 1537/38) is a
of wood: that which burns, is Sulphur; that which comprehensive medical anthropology and cosmol-
smokes, is Mercury; that which becomes ashes, is ogy, yet remains in a fragmentary form. Here
Salt. On the basis of the Tria prima, Paracelsus also Paracelsus distinguished between a terrestrial and
developed a new pathology, whereby he attributed heavenly “part” of the human being, whereby the
a significant role to the stars besides bodily causes terrestrial is subject to the stars, while human free-
in the origin of diseases. The “spark of fire” from dom is of heavenly origin. The Christian aspect of
the stars could for instance make the Sulphur “ill”, Astronomia Magna is evident. The influence of
and in consequence the whole body would suffer neoplatonic thought [> Neoplatonism] in this
disease. The second book of Opus Paramirum, writing is a matter of debate among scholars.
the Tartarus-Buch, relates directly to the Tria
prima of the first. According to Paracelsus the 3. ASTRONOMICAL AND DIVINATORY
Tria prima carry “excrement” (Kot) with them, WRITINGS
and this excrement can also cause diseases in the Paracelsus also wrote astronomical and divina-
body, called tartar-diseases by Paracelsus. The tory works, of which twelve were published (some
Opus Paramirum identifies the stomach as the seat in several editions) in his lifetime. On closer exam-
of tartar production. The third book of the work ination these prove to be thoroughly heterogen-
dealt with women and gynaecological diseases ous. The first prophetic exercise of Paracelsus was
under the title De matrice. In the beginning his Practica... gemacht auff Europen/anzufahen
Paracelsus distinguished between the macrocosm, in dem nechstkunfftigen Dreyssigsten Jar/Bifs aujf
man and woman as three different worlds. Men’s das Vier und Dreyssigst nachvolgend (Almanac
diseases were thus distinct from women’s diseases. for Europe for 1530 until 1534). Seven editions of
The fourth book of Opus Paramirum is entitled this very successful almanac were published in
Buch von den unsichtbaren Krankheiten und ihren 1529-1530 alone; it is not certain whether the first
Ursachen (Book of Invisible Diseases and Their edition appeared in Strasbourg or Nuremberg.
Causes). Its content was not psychiatry in any Paracelsus substantiated the publication of a four-
modern sense, but rather magic in the broadest year almanac in a postscript, stating that one
sense. In the first part Paracelsus described how the need not only take the chief planetary ruler of
Devil could gain influence through “false belief” today’s skies as the basis of prediction. The con-
over humans and their state of health. Like the stellation of the planets also had an effect over

--- Page 348 ---
PARACELSUS 924
time. Moreover, he did not think it necessary to basis to pursue the welfare and resurrection of the
adduce the specific constellations of the year. The soul along the path of eternal ideas. Moreover, the
prognostications are relatively ambiguous. Closely miracles performed by Jesus and the apostles in
linked with the four-year almanac was Pronostica- healing the sick stimulated Paracelsus to postulate
tio... auf dis gegenwertig jar, betreffend ein a new apostolic medicine, which even went beyond
Confederation, so von andern Astronomis und his first reformation of medieval medicine, pro-
Practicanten dis jar ausgelassen und ubersehen ist, claimed by him at the University of Basle in 1527.
printed in 1530. A grand political future was pre- Paracelsus became interested in religious subjects
dicted for this unspecified confederation, which at an early time. His mother had served at the great
would endure for a long time. This prognostication Benedictine abbey of his native Einsiedeln and he
was connected with the so-called Auslegung iiber retained a lifelong and faithful devotion to this
ettliche Figuren Johannes Liechtenbergers, which place. Paracelsus tells us there were several abbots
has survived only in fragmentary form. In 1488 and clergymen among his teachers from different
Johannes Lichtenberger published a prophetic places in his Grosse Wundartzney (Great Book of
astrological work with 45 woodcuts, in which he Surgery). The debate initiated by Martin Luther in
prophesied the appearance of an angelic shepherd 1517 about the need for a reformation of the
and a Kaiser of Peace. In his own unpublished text, Church must have exerted a strong influence on
Paracelsus violently contradicted Lichtenberger the youth, who always questioned the traditions
on account of his pro-French and pro-Habsburg and theories of the ancients. These attempts at
stance. The Kaiser of Peace would come from reform found their way into Paracelsus’s first theo-
“German blood”. A further magical pictorial com- logical writings which stem from the years 1524/
mentary was written about 1529/30. This so-called 25, when trying to establish himself as a physician
Auslegung der Nurnberger Figuren also remained in Salzburg. De septem punctis idolatriae Chris-
unprinted. It was a response to a work of the tianae (Seven Points of Christian Idolatry) gives a
Nuremberg reformer Andreas Osiander of 1527. harsh critique of the Mauerkirche (walled church),
Osiander prophesied the end of the Papacy in his which symbolised a church paralysed in outer
commentary on a series of pictures of the Pope (at splendour and empty rituals, in contrast to an inner
this time ascribed to Joachim von Fiore, the 12th- spiritualistic church. Paracelsus stated: ‘The way to
century Calabrian abbot and prophet). He also saw bliss needs stillness, it shuns clamour, but proceeds
the advent of Luther the reformer in the pictures. from the innermost heart’. At this time he com-
Paracelsus criticised the Papacy vehemently in his posed his works on the Holy Trinity and on the
own commentary of the pictures, but he firmly Virgin Mary. Paracelsus also wrote an important
rejected Osiander’s Lutheran partisanship. No commentary on the first five chapters of St. Mat-
one individual nor group could introduce the nec- thew. This was the starting point of a lifelong and
essary reformation. At this time Paracelsus evi- intensive study of the Gospels, especially St. Mat-
dently no longer had any hopes of the Wittenberg thew, to which he would dedicate several lengthy
reformer. In several writings of the period 1531- commentaries. It is evident that Paracelsus largely
1534 Paracelsus interpreted natural phenomena derived his ethics, be they personal, social or med-
and events (e.g. comets) as divine omens. Man ical, from the Gospels and above all from the Ser-
must read the Bible, in order to understand these mon on the Mount (Matth. 5). The Beatitudes in
signs (he did not reveal how the text should be the Sermon on the Mount contained guidelines for
a righteous life leading to eternal bliss, which
of the year 1536 is a mantic text based on personal Paracelsus carried to their far-reaching but logical
inspiration and makes no reference to the stars. conclusions: he demanded not only the avoidance
Paracelsus adopted the scheme of annual predic- of quarrel and wars, but also strict social justice, in
tions in his last prognostical writings of the period which the rich would share with the poor. These
1536 to 1539. He gives no information regarding radical or even revolutionary social attitudes may
his methods of prediction. have led Paracelsus to join with the revolting
Salzburg miners, an act assumed to have been the
4. THEOLOGY cause of his sudden flight from the town in the
However opposed ~ magic and theology may summer of 1525.
seem, they form a inseparable unity in Paracelsus’s In the following years Paracelsus concentrated
worldview. He understood magic as a method of on his reformation of medicine, based on a system
using the secrets or fundamental laws of nature, of natural philosophy, astronomy and alchemy.
while theology provided him with a philosophical After several frustrations and set-backs in his

--- Page 349 ---
925 PARACELSUS
career — including expulsion from Basle and loss of the Secrets of Theology), where he expounded
of his university position, Vadianus’ snub in his mature views on beatific life. Three further
St. Gallen, and his censorship at Nuremberg — he sets of sermons date from the same period: De
seems to have developed a habit of regularly with- antichristo, In incantatores (about sorcerers), and
drawing to the Appenzeller country of Switzerland In pseudodoctores.
while pondering religious subjects, even to the The preserved theological writings consist of 40
point of completely giving up medical practice. monographs or single tracts, 16 Bible commen-
Only the verse from St. Luke 5:31, as reported in tarles, 20 sermons, 20 writings on the Eucharist,
the Grosse Wundartzney, that only the sick would and 7 Mariological tracts. As a whole, these writ-
need a physician, moved him sufficiently to return ings make up a corpus quite as extensive as the
to his proper profession. This is but one example of medical and philosophical works, but to this day
how much the Gospels gave him solace and were a only half of them have found their way into print.
continuous source of inspiration. As he further tells The remaining and so far unedited works, most of
us, he began to address the common people as a lay them dealing with the New Testament, especially
preacher in ‘taverns, inns and public houses’. In important to Paracelsus, are now being prepared
this period from 1529 to 1535, Paracelsus wrote for a scholarly edition.
the bulk of his theological writings. He wrote At first sight, Paracelsus’s theological style seems
an extensive commentary to the Psalter, which quite orthodox and not so different from tradi-
remains his most voluminous work, even though tional religious thought. For the true Christian
only part of it has survived. From the same period there are laws and commandments to be followed,
we also have commentaries on the Ten Command- the remission of sins has to be attained, and right-
ments and on the prophets Daniel and Isaiah, sev- eous behaviour will pave the way to eternal life.
eral minor monographs about ethical, social and How does this Christian theology relate to the
political subjects, three large commentaries on the Hermetic and alchemical thought of his medical
Gospel of St. Matthew, and several sets of sermons. writings? On closer investigation, the peculiarities
Another two series of tracts are characteristic of become apparent. In contrast to many contempo-
Paracelsus’s theology: the writings on the Eucharist rary religious thinkers, Paracelsus’s theology is
and on the Vita Beata (Beatific Life). The Eucharist based on direct exegesis of the Gospels rather than
played a central role in Paracelsus’s idea of the neue on St. Paul’s epistles. The attainment of eternal life
kreatur (new creation) bestowed on the world by plays a role of the utmost importance. Paracelsus
Christ, which enabled the faithful disciples to per- does not refer to a somewhat remote future: in
form the same works and miracles as their master. “beatific life’ man is given the opportunity to
The Vita Beata comprises tracts concerning the achieve a foretaste of eternity. God’s laws and
attainment of the beatific life, and also on the eter- teachings as laid down in the Bible must be
nal religion, the highest good, the grace of God, observed, but also consist in an active belief in
happy-mindedness, the martyrdom of Christ, the God, respect for God, charity, knowledge and
remission of sins, Christian duties, the honoured hope. Mere outward observance is not enough: the
and the rich, the churches of the Old and the New Commandments have to become alive in Christ
Testament, the resurrection and glorification of and should lead to perfect love of God and one’s
the body, and baptism. The Vita Beata writings neighbour.
are also known as the Philosophiae Magnae Pars Another marked feature of Paracelsus’s philos-
Altera (Second Part of the Great Philosophy), ophy and theology becomes apparent in his specu-
whereas the first part of the Philosophia Magna lation on the double body. Man has a mortal and
consists of tracts regarding popular magic (see an immortal body, one visible and one invisible, the
below). former confined to the realm of nature, the latter
Towards the end of his life Paracelsus entered a ruled by the stars and tending to eternity. Accord-
third phase of literary production in his theological ingly, there is an inside and an outside, an above
works. In his famous Astronomia Magna (Great and a below, a microcosm and a macrocosm. This
Astronomy, 1537/38) he again summarised the notion of a double corporeality may have been
central points of his theology and emphasised the partly inspired by I Corinthians 15, but can also be
difference between the “light of the nature” and found in the Middle Ages, in Neoplatonic and Her-
the light of the Holy Ghost. Some years later, metic philosophy, and in alchemical lore. Paracel-
around 1540, reviewing the two decades that had sus’s bipartition also forms one major difference
elapsed since he first started to write, he laid down with the perspective of + Agrippa of Nettesheim
his De secretis secretorum theologiae (The Secrets who with his “mundus triplex” advocated a

--- Page 350 ---
PARACELSUS 926
tripartite conception of the world. One might sion. One might say he was bound to Mother
think that Paracelsus’s concept of the Tria prima Nature as well as to his Mother Church, and this
consisting of Mercury, Sulphur and Salt would lead dual allegiance may have been one cause of his per-
to a ternary philosophical system. However, this sonal failure during his lifetime. His Astronomia
does not hold for Paracelsus’s view of the spiritual Magna attempts to give a late synthesis of these
composition of man and the universe, but only for obviously conflicting worldviews, whereby Para-
the composition of matter, or more precisely, of celsus exhorts man to become a centrum between
metals, minerals, stones, wood, herbs and all grow- his earthly origin and his heavenly destination.
ing things. Paracelsus regarded these three princi- As an alchemist, Paracelsus was deeply impressed
ples as workmen (werkleut) in the process of with the mystery of the immaculate conception of
creation helping the superior creative principle, the Christ and its implications. He was familiar with
archeus, in differentiating and molding the classical medieval theories of creation and had written a
four elements fire, air, water, and earth, which tract on the generation of man (Das Buch von der
themselves constituted the building blocks of mat- Gebdrung, c. 1520). He obviously attempted to
ter. The combustible Sulphur was bestowing a apply these ideas to the heavenly birth described in
characteristic form upon things, the incombustible the New Testament. He adopted the medieval
Salt was giving the solidity, and the volatile and notion of “limbus” as the womb from which God
mediating Mercury was taking care of the nutri- had created man. Paracelsus saw the limbus as a
tional requirements. When alchemy proceeds to kind of primordial seed or clay which was handed
decompose a thing into its constituents, the mercu- down from generation to generation starting with
rial principle will flee as a fume or manifest as a Adam, and so constituted the very core of man’s
volatile liquid, the sulphurous principle is sepa- spiritual potentialities. The “limbus” of Adam
rated as a combustible oil or resin, and the salty came from below, from nature, and was thus lim-
principle remains as a crystalline or amorphous ited. The birth of Christ represented a neue kreatur
indestructible matter. The idea of Tria prima was coming into the world, a new eternal “limbus” from
highly influential on the conceptual development above, which transferred to man unprecedented
of chemistry, dominating chemical perceptions possibilities. By the power of this “new creation”
until the mid-18th century, and also on iatrochem- Jesus and the apostles were able to perform mira-
istry, representing a promising attempt to explain cles, such as curing the sick, healing the blind and
bodily functions in terms of alchemy. Paracelsus the lame, and even expelling evil spirits and raising
had himself speculated in Opus paramirum (c. the dead. Paracelsus regarded the power to perform
1531) about the operating of Tria prima in the such miracles as the cornerstone of a new and
body. However, there is no firm evidence that an supreme apostolic medicine, surpassing even his
equation of the three Paracelsian principles Mer- own earlier medical reformation. The new “lim-
cury, Sulphur and Salt with the corporeal triparti- bus” was bestowed on a person in baptism and
tion Spirit, Soul and Body respectively, nor even renewed during the Last Supper. The Eucharist
with the Holy Trinity of Father, Son and Holy assumed the utmost importance to Paracelsus,
Ghost, was already part of Paracelsus’s own doc- inspiring an entire set of tracts conceived as a com-
trine. These and further philosophical speculations plete Philosophia de limbo aeterno. In soteriologi-
in interpreting the universe chemically have their cal terms, his central theme was not so much Jesus’
origin among Paracelsus’s foilowers. death on the Cross, but first and foremost the birth
In his early Volumen paramirum (c. 1520), of this new heavenly body.
where he tries to give a new classification of the For Paracelsus, the true Christian Church was
causes of disease, Paracelsus is well aware of his not an external institution with its buildings,
“pagan style” »” in explaining nature and disease in priests, bishops and human laws, but rather an
terms of alchemy and magic, but hastens to empha- inner church based on continuous personal reve-
sise that he is a true Christian. It is possible that lation. Paracelsus took the foundations for this
Paracelsus understood “pagan” philosophy not spiritualistic view of what it meant to be a true
only as synonymous with ancient, but also in a Christian from the Gospels. Here St. Peter played a
narrower sense with Hermetic or Neoplatonic phi- major role, because he was the first to recognise
losophy. On the one hand, Paracelsus felt obliged Jesus as the Christ, the Son of God. According to
to study nature in its light as well as dark aspects, Paracelsus, this was not revealed to Peter out of
while on the other, he had to observe a framework the lower light of nature, but out of the light of
of Christian philosophy. An attempt to combine the Holy Ghost. Thus Peter became the prototype
the two viewpoints produced an inevitable ten- of the mystic, illumined by God; and obviously it

--- Page 351 ---
927 PARACELSUS
was on him - Peter the rock — that Jesus wanted to knew the German translation of Ficino’s De Vita.
build his new Church. Paracelsus suggested that But in the authentic writings of Paracelsus there is
the keys to heaven will be handed to “every Peter” no direct reference or even allusion to ~ Giovanni
who attempts to let himself be guided by the inner Pico della Mirandola, » Agrippa of Nettesheim, or
light. This is why for Paracelsus there were “two any other representative of the Renaissance tradi-
churches”, one being St. Peter’s living church of tion of magia naturalis. However, Paracelsus was
ongoing revelation, and the other one the deeply indebted to his father who himself was
Steinkirche (stony church) for the blind believers a physician and who had instructed him in the
made by man and founded on human laws. “philosophia adepta”, by which Paracelsus may
have meant Hermetic or Neoplatonic philosophy.
5. Macic In view of this paucity of direct references, the
From his study of the Bible Paracelsus was able question of the sources of his magic arises, which
to make a direct link to magic. The period of anti- is a matter of debate among specialists on Paracel-
quity, and with it the world of the New Testament, sus. Will-Erich Peuckert, Walter Pagel and Kurt
was swarming with ghosts, demons, devils, gods Goldammer were firmly convinced that Paracelsus
and magicians, and thus provided an ideal setting had involved himself in the already-existing tradi-
to discuss this topic. Paracelsus followed > Alber- tion of natural magic, to whose theories he gave
tus Magnus in identifying the three kings or magi further elaboration. Pagel even believed that Para-
from the Orient, who had found the Christ child celsus was indebted to sources from antiquity, >
with the aid of the stars, as ideal references for Gnosticism in particular; as his main evidence
the vindication of magic. Paracelsus repeatedly he pointed to Paracelsus’s ideas on the eightfold
commented on this passage from the Gospel of nature of Adam. Charles Webster, in contrast,
St. Matthew. The model of the three kings gave him largely denied the Neoplatonic and Gnostic ori-
the opportunity to define a magus as someone who gins of Paracelsus’s magic, pointing instead to his
interprets the prophets and performs miracles in extensive Biblical references. The truth of the
front of the people, and foretells events by the help matter may lie somewhere between these two
of spirits or the stars. Only a prophet (in later years extremes. Paracelsus’s dependence on_ biblical
Paracelsus would prefer to speak of a “divine magi- sources and his theological arguments have already
cian”) can accomplish more: he speaks and acts by been discussed above. On the other hand, in Para-
direct divine assistance and inspiration, as seen in celsus’s time knowledge was frequently passed on
the case of ~ Moses, who opposed the Egyptian by oral teaching rather than the study of books,
sorcerers. Paracelsus thought that the three magi and Paracelsus, who had been to Italy himself, was
were also proficient in medicine, commenting that certainly well informed about the prevailing philo-
their gifts were of direct medicinal use. Frankin- sophical trends and may have looked upon them as
cense helped to protect mother and child from common knowledge. He was obviously influenced
“flying ghosts”, and myrrh, by way of the mother’s to some degree by Gnostic ideas, because Western
milk, freed the baby from threatening worms. This alchemy, being the art that had motivated him
kind of interrelation of medicine, philosophy, most, went straight back to Hellenistic Egypt and
astronomy and magic was quite commonplace was related to Gnosticism. Paracelsus was deeply
in the Middle Ages, as can be seen in > Peter of convinced that all things - minerals, plants, ani-
Abano. In his later years, Paracelsus interpreted mals and even man — had their invisible counter-
magic as the art of drawing down the powers of the parts in the macrocosm, where they existed as
stars, which he considered proxies of celestial “astra”, which represented their essence. This
ideas, and to make them work for man. Unsurpris- notion of something like eternal ideas lying behind
ingly, he used the term “astronomy” as a synonym all things, which is basic to Paracelsus’s theory of
for, or even saw it as superior to magic. signatures, can certainly be called quintessentially
At the turn of the 16th century, the learned dis- (neo)platonic.
cussion of natural magic was in full flood, but Para- Another problem in studying the magical works
celsus remained relatively silent about his sources. of Paracelsus is that some of them are certainly spu-
Among the abbots mentioned in his Grosse Wund- rious. Although they reflect a thorough familiarity
artzney, there was one ‘von Spanheim’, which may with Paracelsian thought, they lack the originality
be identified with ~ Johannes Trithemius, the characteristic of the genuine works. They often
authority on demonology, witchcraft and cryptog- contain a wild mixture of magical concepts and
raphy. Paracelsus called > Marsilio Ficino the ‘best ideas. These spurious magical writings, combined
Italian physician’, and there is evidence that he with spurious alchemical tracts, were accepted as

--- Page 352 ---
PARACELSUS 928
authentic by posterity for at least three centuries, From about 1530 onwards, however, Paracelsus
thus giving rise to the false academic perception evinced a growing interest in magical issues. He
of Paracelsus as a gold-making alchemist and a first hinted at a scientific view of natural magic
heretical magician consorting with demons and in his important five books Von den unsichtbaren
the Devil. Kranckheiten und deren Ursachen (The Invisible
In this context it is useful to itemise some Diseases and Their Causes, 1531/32). He not only
spurious magical works. The tract De occulta pondered the impact of belief and imagination on
philosophia touches on various magical subjects. the origin of disease and its cure, but also discussed
Although rejecting ceremonial magic as un-Chris- the medical and magical effect of mumia and
tian, it advocates the magical use of pentacles and characters at some length. Mumia was a medicinal
characters. It contains a discussion of visions and preparation derived from an embalmed human
dreams, and earthly ghosts referred to as gnomes. corpse (the Latin word is cognate with the mummy
It reviews the power of the > imagination, which, of ancient Egyptian funerary practice). Paracelsus
when used with malicious intent, may even pro- believed that the quintessence of the invisible
voke pestilence or wars; and it treats of possession human body and its vital force clung to mumia
by spirits and the magical background of thunder- even after death, and could thus be used for mar-
storms. De pestilitate contains a further disquisi- vellous purposes. Paracelsus sought to explain the
tion on the imagination as causing diseases, and power of pilgrimage sanctuaries harbouring a
plague in particular. In this context it develops a sepulchre in terms of the mumia of the saint’s
complicated system of alchemical speculation, corpse attracting the pilgrims.
including the four elements and the three prin- Paracelsus did not regard characters as the spells
ciples, and continues by discussing the meaning of medieval magic. In his view, magical words and
of Kabbalah [> Jewish Influences], imagination, phrases embodied the very language of angels and
magic, the poison from the stars and the magnetic spirits, who in turn had received their powers from
power of human “mumia” which may either cause God. This subjection to heavenly forces signified a
or heal pestilence. The Liber principiorum deals strong vindication of magic to Paracelsus. The
with the magical and medicinal meaning of magician was allowed to perform his art as long as
venomous animals such as snakes, worms, spiders, he was strictly adhering to the good. Consequently,
crayfish and suchlike. The book Archidoxis magica characters were the only way to retrieve the heav-
instructs in the use of magical seals, numbers and enly powers. Like the physician administring herbs
signs. The Liber Azoth contains a kabbalistic the- to heal a patient, the magician attained his goal
ory of the “linea vitae” (the line of life). Although with the aid of characters. Regarding theories of
spurious, all these tracts played a certain role in the magic, this represents an important shift from the
reception of Paracelsian thought that began in the medieval idea of a demoniac influence to that of
late 16th century and exercised a decisive influence an impersonal and quasi-natural agent, and thus
on the spiritualistic and mystic currents of the early can be considered as a attempt to establish natural
modern period (see > Paracelsianism). magic on a scientific basis. In the early 1530s Para-
In his genuine writings Paracelsus discussed celsus produced a set of writings (if, indeed, they
magic from an early date on. In his Volumen Para- are genuine) called Philosophia de divinis operibus
mirum (c. 1520), alongside his theory of the cause et factis, et de secretis naturae (Philosophy of
of disease, Paracelsus also discussed the use of evil Divine works and Actions, and of the Secrets of
spells and enchanted images by “nigromancia” Nature), but also referred to as the first part of the
(black magic), which may evoke an illness in the Philosophia Magna (the second part being the set
victim. Already in his Elf Traktat (Eleven Tracts), of Vita Beata writings mentioned above). Here
written around the same time, he hinted that there Paracelsus offers what is in fact a lengthy collection
were two theories in medicine, corresponding to of independent tracts on various aspects of popular
his double body speculations: the “physica” for the magic, such as witches, demons and cases of pos-
visible world and the “magia” for the invisible session, lunatics, sleep, prophets and fortune-
realm. Only on the basis of the latter could one find tellers, elementals including fairies, gnomes and
the true cause and cure of an illness. In his early salamanders, apparitions, the imagination, charac-
years Paracelsus did not elaborate this medical ters, homunculi and monsters, invocation and
aspect of magic. In his famous Paragranum (1529/ necromancy.
30) Paracelsus built his house of medicine not on In his Erklerung der ganzen astronomei (Expla-
magic but on the four pillars of natural philosophy, nation of All Astronomy, c. 1536) Paracelsus made
astronomy, alchemy and virtue. a further attempt at elevating magic to the status of

--- Page 353 ---
929 PARACELSUS
a comprehensive philosophy of nature. Man and of the eternal limbus, which in fact constituted the
nature had to rely on the “astra” or stars referred very foundations of his belief and served him as
to above as variation on the theme of celestial tools to make magic and the biblical wonders plau-
ideas. This led Paracelsus to define magic as the art sible or even accessible to the true physician. Thus,
of bringing the power of the heavens down into for him, “astronomy” in the sense of magic was the
stones, herbs, words and characters. Magic also cornerstone of medicine, and indeed the mother of
taught one how to transmute one thing into all arts. But Paracelsus also stated that where
another, and demonstrated the significance of the astronomy ended, there religion should start. The
stars, comets and other celestial bodies. Thus he conveyance of knowledge takes place by the two
used “astronomy” as a notion superior to magic, corresponding lights: the light of nature, being
since the essence of things was hidden in the stars. the light of the firmament, in the natural world,
The seven subdivisions of astronomy according to and the light of the Holy Ghost in the eternal, div-
this tract were “astrologia” (the art of knowing the ine world. Paracelsus continued by proposing a
course and the properties of the stars), “magia”, sophisticated classification of astronomy that sur-
“divinatio” (divination), “nigromantia” (the art of passed his former division in the Erklerung. The
controlling astral bodies), “signatum” (the art of “mother astronomy” is split into four subdivi-
detecting man’s individual star), “artes incertae” sional “astronomies”: one that is called “natu-
(the arts of imagination), and “manualis” (the art ralis” and reigns in the realm of nature; one that is
of making magical instruments and talismans). called “supera” and springs from Christ; one that
Within the existing tradition of natural magic there is called “olympi novi” and comes from faith; and
were no models for such a subdivision, so we may finally one that is called “inferorum” and is used by
assume that it was his own invention. the infernal spirits that dominate black magic.
At the end of his life, Paracelsus attempted to Each of these four astronomies is again divided into
summarize his teachings and describe its key points nine “membra” (members): “magia”, “nigroman-
as clearly as possible. Thus in his Labyrinthus tia”, “necromantia”, “astrologia”, “signatum”,
medicorum errantium (Labyrinth of Erring Physi- “artes incertae”, “medicina adepta”, “philosophia
cians, 1537/38) he once again set forth the founda- adepta”, and “mathematica adepta”. There are
tions of his medicine. As in the earlier Paragranum, even more refined subdivisions, not enumerated
he emphasized the importance of understanding here. In this complicated system of philosophy,
nature, the firmament and alchemy, but this time magic played only a restricted role. According to
he also philosophised about the process of attain- the definition given in the Astronomia Magna,
ing knowledge. He spoke about experience, sci- magic was the means to induce the heavenly pow-
ence, and the role of magic. The medical art should ers to come down to man, who served as a “cen-
not be grounded in mere speculation, but in a cer- trum” or “medium” to receive and control them.
tain revelation; then it would be a “magica inven- As the physician was able to extract medicinal
trix” that revealed to the physician all he needed virtues from herbs and plants, the magician could
to know. Thus Paracelsus advocated a scientific likewise summon the astral powers, and he could
method that included intuition as a legitimate way do even more: he could transform them and lead
of attaining knowledge. them to a higher state, thus becoming a master
The crowning of his philosophical endeavours, alchemist who perfects creation. If man taps into
however, was his voluminous Astronomia Magna the infernal realm, he is a sorcerer; if he depends on
or Philosophia Sagax [Great Astronomy or Philos- nature and interprets the light of the firmament, he
ophy of the Wise, 1537/38], that has remained is a magus or wise man; and if he relies solely on the
incomplete. Here he tried to outline a scientific sys- Holy Ghost and heaven, then he is a divine magus
tem that should explain nature as well as the super- or prophet, capable of performing the same won-
natural world, that combined his medical and his ders as Christ. Thus at the end of his life, Paracel-
theological convictions, and that showed the way sus succeeded in uniting his conflicting doctrines
to knowledge and its application. In this sense, the derived from “pagan” and Christian sources into
immense philosophical edifice of the Astronomia one great synthesis.
Magna can be seen as standing at the turning point Paracelsus’s teachings exerted a powerful in-
between the Middle Ages and the Early Modern fluence on posterity. In chemistry, the notion of
Period, and comprises an early but so far only the Tria prima became predominant for two cen-
poorly appreciated contribution to the rise of sci- turies. The attempt to interpret bodily functions in
entific thinking. In the first chapters Paracelsus terms of chemical processes stimulated the devel-
summarized his philosophy of the two worlds and opment of iatrochemistry with > Joan Baptista

--- Page 354 ---
PARACELSUS 93°
van Helmont and Franciscus de le Boé Sylvius as das Verhaltnis von Religion und Naturwissenschaften
important representatives of the 17th century. In in der Wissenschaftlichen Revolution”, Manuskripte,
Thesen, Informationen 16:2 (2000), 17-26 ¢# idem,
pharmacology, after years of ardent debate, the
“Paracelsus on the Lord’s Supper: Coena Dominj
Paracelsian way of preparing chemical remedies by
nostrj Jhesu Christ) Declaratio: A Transcription of the
extracting the active medicinal principle finally Leiden Codex Voss. Chym. Fol. 24, f. 121-29v”, Nova
grew to general acceptance. No less important was Acta Paracelsica 16 (2002), 107-139 # idem, “Paracel-
Paracelsus’s sway over various currents in Western sus’ Declaratio on the Lord’s Supper: A Summary with
esotericism and religious movements, and here Remarks on the Term Limbus”, Nova Acta Paracelsica
only a few can be mentioned. It has been shown 16 (2002), 141-162 @ H. Dopsch, K. Goldammer, P.F.
Kramml (eds.), Paracelsus (1493-1541), Salzburg,
that the Vier Bucher vom wahren Christentum
1993 @ A. Faivre & F. Tristan (eds.) Paracelse, Paris:
(Four Books on True Christendom), written by the
Albin Michel, 1980 # Urs Leo Gantenbein, “Die
eminent Pietist precursor Johann Arndt (1555- Alchemie des Paracelsus”, Nova Acta Paracelsica 11
1621) and a source of religious edification until the (1997), 3-59 # idem, “Medicus ex Deo: Die arztliche
r9th century, is full of allusions to Paracelsus. Ethik des Paracelsus im Licht antiker und mittelalter-
There are also interconnections between Paracel- licher Traditionen”, Nova Acta Paracelsica 12 (1998),
sus and the theosophic writer > Valentin Weigel 220-262 @ idem, “Das Ziircher Paracelsus-Projekt:
Legenden, Kontroversen und Ausblicke in der heutigen
(1533-1588), and the same is definitely and exten-
Paracelsus-Forschung”, Gesnerus 56 (1999), 29-51 ¢
sively the case in the works of the mystic > Jacob idem, “Gesundheit und Krankheit in den Matthdus-
Boehme (1575-1624). In turn, the Christian theos- Kommentaren des Paracelsus”, Salzburger Beitrage zur
ophy of > Johann Georg Gichtel (1638-1710) was Paracelsusforschung 34 (2000), 47-72 ¢ idem, “Ethik
deeply influenced by Boehme. Needless to say, und soziales Denken in den Matthaus-Kommentaren
Paracelsian philosophy plays an important role in des Paracelsus”, Manuskripte, Thesen, Informationen
the esoteric literature of the 18th century, including 19-1 (2002), 26-36 # Ute Gause, Paracelsus: Genese
und Entfaltung seiner friihen Theologie (Spatmittel-
alchemical, Rosicrucian [> Rosicrucianism] and
alter und Reformation, Neue Reihe 4), Tubingen:
partly Masonic [> Freemasonry] sources. J.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 1993 # Carlos Gilly, Para-
celsus in der Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica
Samtliche Werke. 1. Abteilung: Medizinische, natur- Amsterdam: Ausstellung zum 500. Geburtsjahr des
wissenschaftliche und philosophische Schriften (Ed. Theophrastus Bombast von Hohenheim, Paracelsus
K. Sudhoff & W. Matthiessen), vol. 1-14, Munich/ genannt, Amsterdam: In der Pelikaan, 1993 Arlene
Berlin: R. Oldenbourg, 1922-1933 ¢ idem, vol. 14: Miller Guinsburg, “Paracelsian Magic and Theology:
“Das Volumen primum der Philosophia magna. Spuria. A Case Study of the Matthew Commentaries”, Me-
2. Abteilung: Theologische und religionsphilosophische dizinhistorisches Journal 16 (1981), 125-139 # Kurt
Schriften (Ed. K. Goldammer), Wiesbaden/Stuttgart: Goldammer, Paracelsus: Natur und Offenbarung
Franz Steiner, 1955ff. ¢ Paracelsus: Essential Readings (Heilkunde und Geisteswelt 5), Hanover: Theodor
(ed. N. Goodrick-Clarke), North Atlantic Books: Berke- Oppermann, 1953 # Kurt Goldammer, “Magie bei
ley 1999 The Writings of Paracelsus (ed. G. Hanswille, Paracelsus: Mit besonderer Beriicksichtigung des
D. Brumlich), Scarborough, Canada: Merkur Pub., Begriffs einer ‘natiirlichen Magie’”, Studia Leibnitiana
1989 Werke (ed. W.E. Peuckert), vols. 1-5, Darm- (Sonderheft 7), Wiesbaden, 1978, 30-51 (repr. in:
stadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1965-1968 Paracelsus in neuen Horizonten: Gesammelte Aufsatze
Paracelsus: Selected Writings (ed. J.S. Jacobi), Prince- (Salzburger Beitrage zur Paracelsusforschung 24),
ton: Princeton University Press, 1958 # Four Treatises Wien 1986, 321-342 @ Kurt Goldammer, Der géttliche
of Theophrastus von Hohenheim called Paracelsus (ed. Magier und die Magierin Natur (Kosmosophie 5),
H.E. Sigerist), Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1991 Alois M. Haas, “Para-
1941 # The Archidoxes of Magic (and other spurious celsus der Theologe: Die Salzburger Anfange 1524/
writings) (ed. R. Turner), New York: Samuel Weiser, 25”, Paracelsus und Salzburg (ed. H. Dopsch, P.F.
1975 # The Hermetic and Alchemical Writings (ed. Kramml), Salzburg: Gesellschaft fiir Salzburger Lan-
A.E. Waite), London: J. Elliott and Co., 1894. deskunde, 1994, 369-382 @ Pia Holenstein Weidmann,
“Paracelsus propheta: Gottlicher Magier?”, Nova
Lit.: U. Benzenhdfer (ed.), Paracelsus, Darmstadt Acta Paracelsica N.F. 7 (1993), 11-44 @ Ernst Wilhelm
1993 U. Benzenhofer, Paracelsus, Reinbek bei Ham- Kammerer, Das Leib-Seele-Geist-Problem bei Para-
burg, 1997 ¢ Katharina Biegger, “De Invocatione celsus und einigen Autoren des 17. Jahrhunderts,
Beatae Mariae Virginis”: Paracelsus und die Marien- Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner, 1971 # Wolf-Dieter Miiller-
verehrung (Kosmosophie 6), Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, Jahncke, Astrologisch-magische Theorie und Praxis in
1990 @ Lucien Braun, Paracelse de la magie, Stras- der Heilkunde der Friihen Neuzeit (Sudhoffs Archiv,
bourg: Presses universitaires de Strasbourg, 1998 ¢ Beiheft 25), Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1985 ¢ Walter
Michael Bunners, Die Abendmahlschriften und das Pagel, Paracelsus: An Introduction to Philosophical
medizinisch-naturphilosophische Weltbild des Para- Medicine in the Era of the Renaissance, 2nd, rev. ed.,
celsus, Berlin: Theological Dissertation, 1961 ¢ Dane Basle: Karger, 1982 ¢ Will-Erich Peuckert, Theophras-
Thor Daniel, “Paracelsus: Die Sakramentslehre und tus Paracelsus, Stuttgart/ Berlin: Kohlhammer, 1944 ¢

--- Page 355 ---
932 PASQUALLY
Jean-Michel Rietsch, Théorie du langage et exégése “initiatic chief” with which Pasqually had been
biblique chez Paracelse, 1493-1541, Bern/New York: endowed, following his father. But this ingenious
Lang, 200or # Hartmut Rudolph, “Paracelsus”, in: hypothesis has been eliminated by the military
Gerhard Miller (ed.), Theologische Realenzyklopddie,
certificates discovered and published by Christian
Berlin/New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1995, 699-705 ¢
Heinrich Schipperges, “Magia et Scientia bei Paracel- Marcenne in the Bulletin de la Société Martines
sus”, Sudhoffs Archiv 60 (1976), 76-92 # idem, Die de Pasqually (no. 6, 1996; a society based in Bor-
Entienlehre des Paracelsus, Berlin, 1988 ¢ Charles deaux). From these, it appears that an uncle, desig-
Webster, “Paracelsus on Natural and Popular Magic”, nated as “doum [sic] Pasqually”, commanded in
in: Istituto Paracelso (ed.), Atti del convegno inter- 1737 a company of the regiment of Edinburgh
nazionale su Paracelso, Roma: Edizioni Paracelso, Dragoons in the service of Philip V of Spain. As
1994, 89-106 # Hans Schneider, “Johann Arndt als
for Pasqually himself, the Spanish title of nobility Paracelsist”, in: Neue Beitrige zur Paracelsus-
Forschung (ed. by Peter Dilg and Hartmut Rudolph), “Don” (or “Dom”) almost always precedes the
Stuttgart: Akademie der Didzese Rottenburg-Stuttgart, second part of his name (Martines de Pasqually),
1995, 89-110 ¢ Ingo Schiitze, “Zur Ficino-Rezeption and before the first part of his name (Latour de la
bei Paracelsus”, in: Joachim Telle (ed.), Parerga Para- Case) it is often duplicated by the French title, also
celsica: Paracelsus in Vergangenheit und Gegenwart indicating nobility, of “Messire” or “Sire”. There is
(Heidelberger Studien zur Naturkunde der friihen
no doubt about Pasqually’s noble status, attested
Neuzeit 3), Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1991, 39-44 ¢
by many official documents, nor of his title, which J. Telle (ed.): Analecta Paracelsica: Studien zum Nach-
leben Theophrast von Hohenheims im deutschen Kul- was that of écuyer (esquire). He almost always
turgebiet der friihen Neuzeit, Stuttgart, 1994 ¢ Charles signed himself “Don Martines de Pasqually”.
Webster, “Paracelsus confronts the Saints: Miracles, The next enigma is his date of birth. The Société
Healing and the Secularization of Magic”, Social His- Martines de Pasqually, in its Bulletin no. 9 (1999),
tory of Medicine 8 (1995), 403-421 # Andrew Weeks, compared two chronologies deduced from existing
Paracelsus:. Speculative Theory and the Crisis of the
documents that are totally incompatible with each
Early Reformation, New York: State University of New
other. One, calculated from the death certificate York Press, 1997 ¢ Siegfried Wollgast, “Zur Wirkungs-
geschichte des Paracelsus im 16. und 17. Jahrhundert”, among other documents, has Pasqually born in
in: Resultate und Desiderate der Paracelsus-Forschung, 1726 or 1727. But it appears to be invalidated by
Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1993, 113-144. the military certificates mentioned above, which
show that Pasqually had a military career in the
UDO BENZENHOEER (SECTIONS I-3) service of the King of Spain for at least ten years,
URS LEO GANTENBEIN (SECTIONS 4-5)
from 1737, when he was a lieutenant, to 1747 —
which cannot have started when he was ten years
Pasqually, Martines de, * 1709/1709 or old. On the other hand, these certificates accord
1726/1727 Grenoble, ¢ 20/21.9.1774 with the masonic letters patent that Pasqually pro-
Port-au-Prince duced as having been issued to his father in 1738,
which mention him (the son) as being twenty-nine
It has been well said of Martines de Pasqually at the time. This would indicate a birth date of
that he was a “living enigma”. The mystery begins 1708 or 1709. The probabilities thus support an
with his surname. Gérard van Rijnberk, in his work early chronology, which Van Rijnberk already
on Pasqually, takes two pages (I, 14-15) to list the favored (II, 9-10).
variations of his name, whose diversity far exceeds Pasqually’s place of birth was almost certainly
the loose orthography of the time (it was only at the Grenoble; all the official documents agree on this
French Revolution that the registration of names point. His family certainly originated in Spain. In
was normalized and fixed). However, from com- fact, the letters patent of 1738 which he produced
parison of official documents (registry and military in 1762 indicate that his father was born in Ali-
certificates) it seems very likely that his full name cante in 1671. This Spanish origin, on which all
(with many orthographic variations) was Jacques specialists agree, is reinforced by the certificates
de Lyoron (or de Livron) Joachin Latour (or de relating to his military career in the service of the
Latour) de la Case Martines de Pasqually (or else: Spanish crown. Several contemporaries close to
Jacques de Lyoron Latour de la Case Joachin Mar- him bear witness to the fact that his native language
tines de Pasqually). This name appears to consist was not French (the purely phonetic orthography
of two successive surnames, each preceded by a of his letters also points to this, though that in itself
Christian name (Jacques, Joachin). Van Rinberk is not a proof).
suggested that Martines de Pasqually was a “hiero- His origin was not only Spanish, but Jew-
nym”: a sacred name attached to the function of ish. This was already apparent to many of his

--- Page 356 ---
PASQUALLY 932
contemporaries. The denials on this point in a Starting on April 28, 1762, Pasqually settled in
very late letter (1821) of > Jean-Baptiste Willer- Bordeaux, where he resided (except for a few
moz are not enough to cast doubt on Pasqually’s months in Paris in 1766-1767) until his departure
Jewish origins. Besides, on closer reading Willer- for San Domingo on May 5, 1772. He won over
moz’s denials apply to religion, much more than to the lodge La Frangaise, within which he set up
race. In fact, Martines not only declared himself a a “Temple particulier” (private temple): a lodge
Roman Catholic, producing in support a certificate which, after wranglings with the other Bordeaux
of catholicity, but he also required postulants for lodges, especially L’Anglaise, flew its true colors
entry to the > Ordre des Elus Coéns to belong to by taking in 1764 the title of La Frangaise Elue
this confession. This is the very reason why several Ecossaise. It was especially the regiment of Foix-
members of the Reformed Church (e.g. Du Roy Infanterie, which, after a five year tour of duty in
d’Hauterive) had to abjure their membership of San Domingo, returned to take up quarters in Bor-
the latter. Robert Amadou, after studying the ques- deaux in July 1765, that became a privileged field
tion for some fifty years, concluded (cf. Intro- of activity for Pasqually. He founded there a “Tem-
duction to his 1995 edition of the Traité sur la ple coen” called “des Elus Ecossais”, under the
Réintégration) that ‘his paternal family was .. . of aegis of the military lodge Josué which was proba-
Spanish Jewish Marrano origin, or, more precisely, bly created for this purpose. Among other masons,
semi-Marrano’. The term “semi-Marrano” is used he initiated two officers, P.A. de Grainville and
because the authentic Marranos only pretended G.A. de Champoléon, who would later become
to be converted to Christianity, to deceive their his official collaborators and his voluntary secre-
countrymen, whereas Christianity is inherent in taries. It was through them that > Louis-Claude
Martines’ doctrine, and he always professed it de Saint-Martin, assigned to the Foix-Infanterie in
himself. This Christianity, as it appears in his the very month of its return to France, became
works, is peculiar but nonetheless authentic. acquainted with Pasqually — a decisive encounter
According to Amadou, who thoroughly analyzed for both men — and was speedily admitted to the
it (in the Introduction cited above, and in the Pref- Order.
ace to his 1999 edition of the Lecons de Lyon), As the Grand Lodge of France became caught
Pasqually belonged to a very particular and very up in the quarrels between LAnglaise and La
archaic category of Christianity, which one would Frangaise, Pasqually addressed to it a copy of the
have thought extinct for over a thousand years: translation of the “constitution and patent”, writ-
“Judeo-Christianity”. This would seem to confirm ten ‘in the English idiom’, as he said, granted to his
his own constant contention that the knowledge he father on May 20, 1738, and transmissible to him-
possessed had been transmitted to him by succes- self by ‘Charles Stuard [sic], King of Scotland, Ire-
sion. Willermoz, echoing this, states that ‘in his land, and England, Grand Master of all the Lodges
ministry, he had succeeded his father’. The possi- on the surface of the earth’. This patent makes
bility of an “esoteric transmission” inside or out- mention of ‘Don Martinez Pasqualis, Esquire, aged
side the family had already been aired by > René 67 years, native of the town of Alicante in Spain’,
Guénon, whom the “enigma of Martines de and of ‘Joachim Dom Martinez Pasqualis, his elder
Pasqually” provoked to the point of writing at least son, aged 28 years, native of the town of Grenoble
four articles, some of them long ones, between in France’. This document is generally considered
1914 and 1936. as apocryphal, though Robert Amadou suspends
Be that as it may, nothing is known about judgment on this point. In any case, no decisive
Pasqually’s youth except his recently discovered argument has been produced either to confirm or
military career. We do not even know his biography to disprove its authenticity. The question of the Stu-
before his entry onto the masonic stage — and the arts’ relations with > Freemasonry, whether overt
historical stage — during the decade 1750-1760. The or veiled (a question also relevant to the charter
first chapter founded by him seems to have been the granted to Baron Karl von Hund, founder of the
Chapitre des Juges Ecossais in Montpellier, 1754. system known as “Strict Observance”) is currently
He then travelled through France, mainly in the under research in the North of England and in Scot-
south but also in Paris and Lyons. At Toulouse, land. Finally, the Grand Lodge of France took a
where in 1760 he explained before the “united step of general import: in August 1766 it decreed
lodges of Saint John” what seems from the minutes the abolition of the high degrees. It rescinded this
to have already been a sketch of his system, he failed order in October, but not before it had excluded
to convince the brethren. He had more success in Pasqually from the lodges under its control, calling
Guyenne, which is important for what follows. him a “sectarian”. However, being itself prey to

--- Page 357 ---
933 PASQUALLY
persistent troubles that sometimes involved acts of 8, 1996-1998. Incidentally, this society has pub-
violence, the Grand Lodge was dissolved by royal lished a calendar, year by year, of all the events
edict on February 21, 1767. relating to Martines’ life).
Henceforth, Pasqually had a clear field to set up From 1772 until September 20 (or more likely
his own system, the Ordre des Chevaliers Macons 21), 1774, the date of his death in Port-au-Prince,
Elus Coens de l’Univers (originally called Ordre des Pasqually was actively engaged with his Order:
Elus Coens de Josué). During a several months’ much more so than has been claimed, indeed
stay in Paris (end of 1766 to beginning of 1767), he almost “feverishly” according to Van Rijnberk. He
admitted many masons, including Willermoz — an sent out rituals, instructions, messages of all kinds.
encounter that would be as important as that with As his successor as Grand Souverain de l’Ordre,
Saint-Martin, though of a very different kind — and since his son was not yet old enough, he had named
also Bacon de la Chevalerie. The latter was a mason his cousin by marriage Caignet de Lester. But
of great skill, whom in the following year Pasqually the latter died in his turn on December 11, 1778,
made his “universal Substitute”, at the same time and was replaced by Sebastian de Las Casas,
(spring equinox, 1767) as he founded the Sover- who is supposed also to have been a relative of
eign Tribunal and promulgated the statutes of the Pasqually’s. Meanwhile the Order disintegrated,
Order. and in 1781 Las Casas set all the members at
Returning to Bordeaux, Pasqually married in liberty. But the history of the Elus Coéns was far
September 1767 the niece and sister of two officers from over.
of the regiment of Foix Infanterie. She bore him a At the height of its prosperity, the Ordre des
son in June 1768, whom he counted on as a suc- Chevaliers Macons Elus Coéns de |’Univers had
cessor (using this term in a letter to Willermoz) at counted scarcely a dozen temples, enrolling about
the head of the Order, and wrote to Willermoz 100 members. Most of the temples fell into decline,
that he had admitted him as Grand Master Coén and the members changed their allegiance. How-
right after his baptism. The Abbé Pierre Fournié ever, at least two temples remained active until
(see below) was his tutor for a time. But thanks the revolutionary epoch. The Toulouse temple, as
to the turbulences of the revolutionary period, this revealed by the Du Bourg papers, continued work-
son ended as a simple police superintendent under ing under the direction of Du Roy d’Hauterive; that
the name of De La Tour (or Latour) de la Case of Lyons, under Willermoz. It was in Lyons, from
(“Pasqually” having disappeared). Serge Caillet (in 1774 to 1776, that occurred those “rehearsals” of
the journal L’Esprit des choses 7, 1994), and the Martinesian doctrine already noted by Vulliaud
Société Martines de Pasqually (Bulletin 8, 1998) and Guénon, first published by Antoine Faivre in
have traced the drab career of this son from 1814 1975 under the title Conférences des Elus Cohens
to 1830. Another son, born in 1771, died in 1773. de Lyon, and in a more complete edition by Robert
In 1768 Saint-Martin, then aged twenty-five, was Amadou in 1999 under the title Les Lecons de
introduced to Pasqually by Grainville and Cham- Lyon aux Elus Coéns.
poléon, while in the same year Willermoz was This document is of capital importance, and
ordained Réau-Croix by Bacon de la Chevalerie in an indispensable complement to the unfinished
Paris. Willermoz was re-ordained “sympatheti- exposition which is the Traité sur la réintégration
cally”, meaning at a distance, by Pasqually himself des étres dans leur premiére propriété, vertu et
inv: puissance spirituelle divine (Treatise on the reinte-
From 1767 to 1772, Martines organized his gration of beings in their first property, virtue, and
Order, furnishing it with instructions, rituals, and divine spiritual power; edited by Robert Amadou
various recommendations. He started writing the in 1995 from a manuscript of Saint-Martin), or
Traité with the enthusiastic but disordered assis- Traité de la réintégration des étres créés dans leurs
tance of the Abbé Pierre Fournié as secretary, then, primitives propriétés, vertus et putssances spiri-
from 1771, with the much more methodical and tuelles divines (Treatise on the reintegration of cre-
effective help of Saint-Martin (whom he ordained ated beings in their primitive properties, virtues,
Réau-Croix in 1772). His faithful disciples Grain- and divine spiritual powers; ed. R. Amadou in
ville and Champoléon acted as occasional collabo- 1974 from two other texts). To these should be
rators. Despite this, things were far from being added the numerous rituals and instructions made
finished when Pasqually embarked on May 5, 1772 available by the discovery of Fonds Z (derived from
for San Domingo, in order to sort out matters of Saint-Martin) and the correspondence of Pasqually
inheritance (the Société Martines de Pasqually has published by > Papus, by Van Rijnberk, and in the
passably explained the latter; see Bulletin 6, 7, and journal Renaissance Traditionnelle. Among the

--- Page 358 ---
PASQUALLY 934
notable interpreters of Pasqually’s thought are This science is a Judaeo-Christian gnosis, or
Saint-Martin, who developed it in his works Des rather one that is both Jewish and Christian: a gno-
erreurs et de la vérité (On errors and truth, 1775) sis not descriptive, but active. It does not merely
and the Tableau naturel des rapports qui existent obtain knowledge of the reasons for the original
entre Dieu, !homme et lunivers (Natural table fall of man, of his “prevarication”, but urges and
of the relationships existing between God, man, helps him to repair the consequences of this fall. To
and the universe, 1782); and Willermoz, who this end it obtains the “motor” or instrument of a
expounded it in the Instruction secréte au Profeés reconciliation of man with God, then of his ‘reinte-
(Secret instruction to the Profés) and especially in gration in his primitive properties, virtues, and
the Instruction secrete aux Grands Profes (Secret divine spiritual powers’. For Pasqually, the Ordre
instruction to the Grands Profés), both written des Chevaliers Elus Coéns de l’Univers was sup-
shortly before 1778. There is also the work of Abbé posed to provide this “motor” or instrument.
Pierre Fournié, Ce que nous avons été, ce que nous If this Order seems to resemble other high-degree
sommes, ce que nous deviendrons (What we have masonic systems or regimes flourishing at the time,
been, what we are, what we shall become; 1801): Pasqually thought, on the contrary, that those
a confused and diffuse work but not lacking in orig- belonged to the “apocrypha”, to the “profane”.
inal inspiration. For him, his system was the only authentic one.
If one combines the last title with that of the Thus he wrote, in his rather peculiar style: ‘I am
Traité sur la réintégration, one has a first glimpse, only a feeble instrument which God wishes to use,
partial but faithful, of Pasqually’s doctrine. unworthy as I am, to recall men, my fellows, to
“Doctrine” is the right term, because he taught their first masonic state, which is to say spiritually
“with authority”, like a master, not like a thinker man or soul, so as to make them see truly that they
expounding a theory of his own invention. are really man-God, being created in the image and
Pasqually presented himself as the heir and the semblance of this all-powerful Being’ (letter to
transmitter of a long tradition, of supra-human ori- Willermoz, August 13, 1768).
gin: he declared in a letter to Willermoz: “The sci- The Order created by Pasqually consisted of a
ence that I profess is certain and true, because it sequence of ten degrees, if one includes the three
does not come from man’. Pasqually was confident “blue” degrees of Apprentice, Companion, and
of having been taught or inspired from above; in Master, outwardly similar to those of regular >
one place in the Traité he writes: ‘I will explain it to Freemasonry which he called “profane” (an under-
you as clearly as the truth of wisdom has dictated it standable epithet in this context, since the term ety-
to me’. It is clear that for him, the wisdom in ques- mologically refers to that which is “outside the
tion was not human or mundane. Temple”). But the similarity is limited to the names
The doctrine taught by Pasqually is thus a sci- of these three degrees. As for the actual Coén
ence, a “science of man” as > Joseph de Maistre degrees, they are seven in number, distributed in
would later write (he who never reneged on his four classes (these numbers are important, for the
original Martinesism, on this point as on many Martinesian doctrine is accompanied by a precise
others). It is a science of man in his ‘relationships and complex numerology). Though their names
with God and with the universe’, as Saint-Martin vary with the sources and epochs, their divisions
expounds it in his Tableau naturel. Taking as its remained unchanged: (A) Maitre Grand Elu (or
point of departure man and the world in their cur- Maitre Parfait Elu), transitional degree (somewhat
rent state, this science goes back to their origins and like the Maitre Ecossais de Saint-André in the
anticipates their final ends. It begins by speaking of Régime Ecossais Rectifié). (B) Classe du Porche,
the primitive state of immediate proximity, even of comprising the degrees of Apprenti Coén, Com-
unity, with God of man created in God’s image. It pagnon Coén, and Maitre Coén (or Maitre partic-
goes on to the present state of “privation”, of rup- ulier). (C) Classe du Temple, with the degrees of
ture and separation from God. It anticipates a state Grand Maitre Coén (or Grand Architecte), Cheva-
of reconciliation with God, followed by “reinte- lier d’Orient (or Grand Elu de Zorobabel), Com-
gration”, a return to God. For Pasqually, sacred mandeur d’Orient (or Apprenti Réau-Croix). (D)
anthropology and cosmology are thus inseparable, The degree of Réau-Croix, which constitutes a
each explaining the other. They are tributaries of a class of its own. Pasqually conceived of these seven
certain “science of God” which is not theology degrees as referring to the seven gifts of the Spirit,
properly speaking, but rather theosophy, because and as leading progressively and pedagogically to
what the theosopher grasps of God, or what grasps the ever more advanced and integral practice of a
him, is Divine Wisdom. ceremonial cult. This cult was a theurgy, in that it

--- Page 359 ---
95) PASQUALLY
involved and activated the divine energies. It was the Thing was not summoned, for it could not be;
also a liturgy, the “common work” of masons (a it manifested, it caused an epiphany, to express its
word synonymous, for Pasqually, to “men”) who satisfaction and benevolence. That having been
are involved in it and of “spiritual and intelligent said, the cult itself did not have as its goal the
beings” (namely angels) who cooperate in it. The manifestation of the Thing; it was only the occa-
first man, priest-king of the universe, was originally sion for it. This cult had another object, which
consecrated to this “primitive cult”. Pasqually thus is sacrificial: it was a matter of “operating”, or at
proposed to his disciples that they should apply least of advancing, the reconciliation of man and
themselves to it again, following new methods that of the universe. As Willermoz summed it up, it
appropriate to the new state of man, who carries was a cult of expiation, of purification, of reconcil-
the stigmata of his original fall; and this so as iation, and of sanctification.
to “operate” his personal reconciliation and the The time seems to have passed when Martines
universal reconciliation (that of all creation): the was decried as a charlatan and an impostor, or else
“reintegration”. These views are not dissimilar to as merely a fantasist full of muddled and bizarre
those that some Fathers of the Church called ideas. One is entitled to re-read today, with new
“transfiguration” and “deification”. Meanwhile, eyes, the concordant witness of two of his disciples:
the cosmic liturgy proposed by Pasqually does not ‘This extraordinary man, of whom I have never
intend rivalry with the church liturgy, nor to sub- known the like’ (Willermoz); ‘This extraordinary
stitute for the latter (Pasqually required his disci- man is the only living man I have known whom I
ples to assiduously follow the services of the have not fathomed’ (Saint-Martin).
Roman Catholic Church, as well as the daily prac-
tice of a ritual of prayers modelled, with due adap- Martines de Pasqually, Traité de la réintégration des
tation, on the monastic “hours”). étres créés dans leurs primitives propriétés, vertus et
puissances spirituelles divines, Paris: Chacornac, 1899
This is why the Ordre des Elus Coéns, which is
¢ new eds.: (A) Robert Amadou (ed.), Paris: Robert
(to quote the recent title of an article by Serge Cail-
Dumas, 1974 (on the right-hand page, copy of the
let in Renaissance Traditionnelle) ‘a school of 1899 edition, on the left-hand page, reproduction of
virtue and prayer’, finally appears as a sort of reli- one of the original manuscripts) ¢ (B) Paris: Editions
gious order. Its theurgical ceremony was not magi- Traditionnelles, 1988 ¢ (C) Le Tremblay: Diffusion
cal, in the often negative sense of the word. It was rosicrucienne, 1993 (which presents the facsimile of a
not aimed at acquiring natural or supernatural manuscript different from that of A) ¢ (D) Le Trem-
blay: Diffusion rosicrucienne, 1995 (scholarly ed. of
powers. The famous “passes” or “luminous
the 1993 manuscript).
glyphs” (that is, the tangible manifestation of a Pierre Fournié, Ce que nous avons été, ce que nous
“presence” in the chamber of theurgical operation) sommes, et ce que nous deviendrons. Premiere partie
were not, as is sometimes thought, the actual goal (the second part was not published), London: A.
of the operations. Pasqually saw in these passes Dulau, 1801.
nothing more than symptoms or signs indicating
Lit.: Robert Amadou, “Martines de Pasqually”, L’Initi-to the theurgist that his reconciliation was in
ation I (1969), 6-30; 2 (1969), 58-84; 3 (1969), 139-
progress. Theurgy, he wrote, is ‘a ceremony and a
174 ¢ R. Amadou & Catherine Amadou, “Le combat
rule of life to enable the invocation of the Eternal in singulier du Grand Souverain contre la Maconnerie
holiness’. This rule of life, an indispensable condi- apocryphe, ou Martines de Pasqually aux Archives du
tion, demanded a rigorous hygiene of body, soul, Grand Orient de France”, Renaissance Traditionnelle
and spirit that is almost ascetic. The ceremonial 131-132 (2002), 250-281 # Thierry Boudignon, “La
was precise, exacting, and religious: it was destined mort du fils de Martinés de Pasqually”, Renaissance
Traditionnelle 121 (2000), 32-43 ¢ Bulletin de la Société
to ensure the communication with good spirits and
Martines de Pasqually (Michelle Nahon etc., Annual
to prevent communication with the “perverse spir- Newsletter), Bordeaux: Librairie Au Vieux Grimoire,
its” (i.e., demoniac). The “pass” was thus the man- 1990 @ Serge Caillet, “Le Parcours insolite de Jean
ifestation of what Pasqually called la Chose (the Delatour, fils de Martines de Pasqually”, L'Esprit des
Thing), by which he meant Wisdom personified, Choses 7 (1994), 72-84 ¢@ Alice Joly, Un mystique lyon-
the divine Sophia. According to the discriminating nais {J.-B. Willermoz] et les secrets de la Franc-Macon-
analysis by Robert Amadou (in a radio broadcast nerie, Macon: Protat, 1938; reprinted Paris: Demeter,
1986 @ René Le Forestier, La Franc-Maconnerie occult-
of March 4, 2000 devoted to the Elus Coéns), ‘the
iste au XVIII? siécle et ’Ordre des Elus Coéns, Paris:
Thing is not the person of Jesus Christ ..., the Dorbon, 1928 ¢ idem, La Franc-Maconnerie templiére
Thing is not Jesus Christ; it is the presence of Jesus et occultiste aux X VIII* et XIX° siécles (A. Faivre, ed.),
Christ’, just as the Shekinah was the presence of Paris: Aubier-Montaigne, 1970; reprinted Paris: La
God in Solomon’s Temple. In the Martinesian cult, Table d’Emeraude, 1987; Paris: Arché-Edidit, 2003 ¢

--- Page 360 ---
PASQUALLY 936
Papus (Gérard Encausse), Martinés de Pasqually, sa tonic philosophy (1592). Patrizi died there a few
vie — ses pratiques magiques — son oeuvre — ses disciples, years later, in the process of revising his Nova de
suivi des catéchismes des Elus Coens, Paris: Chamuel, universis philosophia (Ferrara, 1591, *1593[4])
1895; reprinted Paris: Dumas, 1976; Paris: Demeter,
in order to try and win the approval of the Con-
1986 @ Michel Taillefer, “Les disciples toulousains
gregation of the Index, which had first asked de Martinés de Pasqually”, in: Le Temple cohen de
Toulouse (1760-1792), Cariscript, Paris: Documents for emendations and subsequently condemned
martinistes 25, 1986 Gerard Van Rijnberk, Un thau- the book.
maturge au X VIII® siecle: Martinés de Pasqually (sa vie, It would be hard, even among Renaissance
son Oeuvre, son Ordre), vol. 1, Paris: Alcan, 1935; vol. writers, to discover an author whose life and work
2, Lyon: Derain-Radet, 1938 (several reprints). were more intricate, and who published on a wider
range of subjects — including, in Patrizi’s case, some
JEAN-FRANCOIS VAR
on which he does not seem to have received formal
training. As a poet and “man of letters”, Patrizi
Patrizi, Francesco (Frane Petric’), took part in the literary controversies of his time,
* 25.04.1529 Cherso d’Istria, like the dispute opposing Ariosto to T. Tasso (he
t 6.02.1597 Rome sided with the former), as well as in the activities
of learned circles like the “Accademia Veneziana
An original case of a (partly self-taught) scholar, della Fama”, well-known for its “encyclopedic”
with an unconventional career and adventurous and innovative interests, much akin to his own.
existence, Patrizi was born in the borderland The obvious links between memory [~~ Mnemon-
between the Venetian Republic and what would ics] and rhetorics, history and the political and spir-
nowadays be Croatia. During the first half of the itual powers of language (themes dear to 16th
1550s, he studied at Ingolstadt and Padua and century Humanists), he dealt with in his dialogues
probably became acquainted there with both the Della Historia (Venice, 1560) and Della Retorica
peripatetic and neoplatonic philosophical tradi- (ibid. 1562; a Della Poetica was partially published
tions, including the writings of > Ficino. The end later in 1586), in an attempt to substitute Aristo-
of the same decade he spent in Venice, trying to tle’s views with a new philosophy of discourse and
make a name for himself as a poet and, like so of history (preceding J. Bodin in this last respect).
many other /etterati of his time, establish his status His criticism of Aristotle he developed in his
as an accomplished text editor and a kind of “pub- famous Discussiones peripatetice (Ist part Venice,
lishing consultant”, possibly in view (or in lieu?) of 1571; complete ed. Basel, 1581), and in the Nova
a still elusive academic tenure. It certainly does de universis philosophia, although this last work
come as a surprise to find him residing mostly in does retain several peripatetic conceptions (as
Cyprus during the years 1562-1568, in the quite regards mathematics, for instance). The contents of
different role of a steward of agrarian estates and a two late scientific treatises (Della nuova geometria
civil administrator for the Contarini and Mocenigo and De rerum natura, 1587; there is even another
families. His return to Venice, just before the outset writing on ancient roman strategy, of machiavel-
of the 1570s, was followed by several sojourns in lian inspiration) were subsequently more or less
Spain, where he served as philosophical advisor (to incorporated into the relevant parts of his Nova de
the Viceroy of Catalogna), counselor (more or less universis philosophia. This magnum opus consists
self-appointed, it seems) and agent for greek man- in an imposing fourfold exposé of metaphysics and
uscripts to King Philipp II. He does not appear to natural philosophy, structured according to the
have been very successful in any of these activities; themes of light (both immaterial and corporeal);
but back in Italy again, circumstances became the universal scale of being (from the plotinian One
more favorable and eventually enabled him to downwards) and its links with the Trinity and the
finally secure some considerably more congenial divine attributes in Christian garb; the world-soul
positions. This turn for the better took place from (and the status of individual human souls); and the
1576 onwards, first in Modena (in the service of physical worid (resting in turn on the four basic
a learned noblewoman), then (1578) at the Court principles of space, light, heat and humidity).
of Alfonso II, last Duke of Ferrara, where Patrizi Patrizi’s interest in number [> Number Sym-
was created (at his own request) professor of bolism] and geometry applied to cosmology
platonic philosophy at the local University. Better (principally in view of the distinction between
still, on becoming Pope Clement VIII, his friend “pure”, mathematical space and physical bodies),
Cardinal I. Aldobrandini called him to the Uni- and in light metaphysics, clearly reflect (as pointed
versity of Rome (La Sapienza), again to teach pla- out long ago by P.O. Kristeller) the strong neopla-

--- Page 361 ---
237, PATRIZI
tonic and ficinian inclinations which eventually author’s many influential relations within and out-
made him famous. His latin translations of Pro- side the Church.
clus’ Theological and Physical Elements (1583), of
the Corpus Hermeticum and the Chaldaean Ora- Francesco Patrizi da Cherso, La Citta felice, Venice:
cles (1593), of the spurious Theology of Aristotle Griffio, 1553 ¢ Della Historia diece dialoghi, Venice:
A. Arrivabene, 1560 ¢ Della retorica diece dialoghi,(x591r), and his compilation of an arithmological
Venice: EF. Senese, 1562 @ Procli Diadochi Elementa
(and hitherto unpublished) De numerorum mys-
theologica et physica, Ferrara, 1583 Discussiones
teriis (1594) obviously reflect the same perspective, peripatetic [Base]: P. Perna, 1586] (Z. Pandzic ed.),
which incited him repeatedly to declare Aristotle’s Koln-Weimar: Bohlau Verlag, 1999 # De rerum natura
philosophy contradictory and inferior to Plato’s, libri I, Ferrara: V. Baldinus, 1587 # Nova de Univer-
and furthermore incompatible with Church doc- sis Philosophia, Ferrara: B. Mammarelli, 1591 [reprint
trines. In doing so, Patrizi not only intended to Zagreb 1979] # Magia philosophica, Hamburg, 1593
[separate ed. of the Oracles and Hermetica| ¢ Della
distance himself from the kind of “concordism”
poetica (D. Aguzzi Barbagli, ed.), 3 vols., Florence:
dear to Pico and others, but aimed at nothing
Olschki, 1969-1971 # Lettere ed opuscoli inediti
less than uprooting the scholastic traditions of (D. Aguzzi Barbagli, ed.), Florence: Olschki, 1975 ¢
learning, which were currently being given new De spatio physico et mathematico |V. Baldinus, Ferrara
prominence by the Counter-Reformation. His bold 1587] (H. Védrine, ed.), Paris: Vrin, 1996.
request to the Pope, to make the study of his Nova
Lit.: L. Bolzoni, L’universo dei poemi possibili: Studi
de universis philosophia compulsory in the Facul-
su Francesco Patrizi da Cherso, Rome: Bulzoni, 1980
ties of theology of Christendom, is a clear indica- ¢ P. Castelli (ed.), Francesco Patrizi filosofo platonico
tion of his high hopes to change the course of nel crepuscolo del Rinascimento, Florence: Olschki,
catholic cultural politics, and have his own brand 2003 @ L. Deitz, “Space, Light and Soul in Francesco
of rational synthesis between Plato, the prisci the- Patrizi’s Nova de universis philosophia (1591)”, in:
ologi (mainly > Hermes Trismegistus) and Christ- A. Grafton and N. Siraisi (eds.), Natural Particulars:
Nature and the Disciplines in Renaissance Europe,ian doctrines promoted to official status.
Cambridge (Ma.): MIT Press, 1999, 139-169 ¢
For Patrizi is essentially not concerned with the
J. Henry, “Francesco Patrizi da Cherso’s Concept of
more practical esoteric aspects of late ~ neopla- Space and its later Influence”, Annals of Science 36
tonism and hermetic philosophy [> Hermetic Lit- (1979), 549-575 P.O. Kristeller, Eight Philosophers
erature], like theurgy or > astrology, although he of the Italian Renaissance, Stanford (Ca.): Stan-
does acknowledge their existence; his real pursuit is ford University Press, 1964, 110-26 @ C. Leijenhorst,
to establish proof of some of the more theoretical “Francesco Patrizi’s Hermetic Philosophy”, in: R. van
den Broek & W.J. Hanegraaf (eds.), Gnosis and Her-
issues of the Christian faith by means of hermetic-
meticism from Antiquity to Modern Times, Albany:
platonic arguments. Thus applied, the pia philo- SUNY Press, 1998, 125-146 @ T. Leinkauf, I/ neo-
sophia seems to lend a sound rational basis for the platonismo di Francesco Patrizi come presupposto
development of a new Christian metaphysics, apt della sua critica ad Aristotele, Florence: La Nuova
moreover to be successfully preached to all non- Italia, 1990 ¢ M. Muccillo, “Marsilio Ficino e Fran-
Catholics, on account of its logical effectiveness. cesco Patrizi da Cherso”, in: G.C. Garfagnini (ed.),
Marsilio Ficino e il ritorno di Platone: Studi e docu-One can hardly avoid having the impression that,
menti, Florence: Olschki, 1988 (2 vols.), 615-679 ¢
in Patrizi’s estimate (and quite contrary to Ficino’s),
eadem, “Aristotelismo, platonismo ed ermetismo ne
the core of truth which was eventually to receive ‘La Citta felice’ di Francesco Patrizi da Cherso”, in:
the shape of Christian doctrine had in fact been G. Saccaro del Buffo & A.O. Lewis (eds.), Utopie per
much more satisfactorily expressed by the ancient gli anni Ottanta: Studi interdisciplinari sui temi, la
sages (~ Zoroaster, Orpheus, Hermes, Pythago- storia, 1 progetti, Rome, 1987, 553-577 # eadem,
ras), whose words and wisdom operated “divine” Platonismo, Ermetismo e “prisca theologia”: Ricerche
di storiografia filosofica rinascimentale, Florence:
miracles. This catena sapientum having been
Olschki, 1996 [on Patrizi, 73-193] # M. Mulsow,
almost interrupted by the Flood, and later polluted “Philosophia Italica’ als reduzierte prisca-sapientia-
by Aristotle’s deviation, it falls to Patrizi’s “new Ideologie: Antonio Persio und Francesco Patrizis
philosophy” to retrieve the true signification and Rekonstruktion der Elementenlehre”, in: M. Mulsow
spiritual efficacy of Christian dogmas, by restoring (ed.), Das Ende des Hermetismus: Historische Kritik
their concord with the universal and primordial und neue Naturphilosophie in der Spatrenaissance,
Tiibingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2002, 253-280 ¢@ ALL. religio (but how the rational side squares with the
Puliafito Bleuel (ed.), [FE Patrizi] Nova de Universis
miracle-working one, is not explained). Such a
Philosophia: Materiali per un’ edizione emendata,
didactic and theological purpose was bound to be Florence: Olschki, 1993 ¢ eadem, “Hermetische Texte
greeted with suspicion and ill-favour by contem- in Francesco Patrizis Nova de Universis Philosophia”,
porary catholic authorities, notwithstanding the in: Mulsow, 0.c., 237-251 @ E Purnell, “Francesco

--- Page 362 ---
PATRIZI 938
Patrizi and the Critics of Hermes Trismegistus”, Journal Péladan became known through the publication
of Medievaland Renaissance Studies 6 (1976), 1§ 5-178 of articles on Renaissance and classical painting,
(repr. in Mulsow, 0.c., 105-126 @ E. Rosen, “Francesco and through the connections of his mistress, Hen-
Patrizi and the celestial Spheres”, Physis 26 (1984),
riette Maillat (1849-2), a veritable Egeria of the
305-324 P. Rossi, “La negazione delle sfere e l’astro-
literary types who gravitated around Léon Bloy biologia di E Patrizi”, I! Rinascimento nelle corti
padane: Societa e cultura, Bari: Laterza, 1977, 401- (1846-1917) and » Huysmans. Péladan’s Le Vice
437 [*Immagini della scienza, Rome, 1987, 109-147] ¢ supréme (The supreme vice, 1884) was published
K. Schuhmann, “Francesco Patrizi en de hermetische with a preface by Barbey d’Aurevilly (1808-1889),
filosofie”, in: G. Quispel (ed.), De hermetische gnosis in and, being the first occultist novel, brought him
de loop der eeuwen, Baarn, 1992, 339-355 @ C. Vasoli, notoriety. He attempted to pursue a double career
“Francesco Patrizi e la tradizione ermetica”, Nuova
as littérateur and spiritual master in the Parisian
Rivista Storica 1980, 25-40 ¢ idem, “Videa della ‘prisca
sapientia’ in Francesco Patrizi”, in: M. Fagiolo (ed.), occultist world by combining a series of “classic”
Roma e l’Antico nell’arte e nella cultura del Cinque- novels — A coeur perdu (Lost heart, 1887), La
cento, Rome, 1985, 41-56 # idem, “Uhermétisme a Gynandre (The man-woman, 1891), Pérégrine et
Venise, de Giorgio a Patrizi”, in: A. Faivre (ed.), pérégrin (1904) in the series “La décadence latine”
Présence d’Hermes Trismégiste, Paris: Albin-Michel, (Latin decadence) — with a series on occult themes.
1988, 120-152 ¢ idem, Francesco Patrizi da Cherso,
He called the latter “L-Amphithéatre des sciences
Rome: Bulzoni, 1989 ¢ M. Wilmott, “Aristoteles Exo-
mortes” (The theater of dead sciences), including
tericus, Acroamaticus, Mysticus: Two Interpretations
of the Typological Classification of the ‘Corpus Comme on devient mage (How to become a magi-
Aristotelicum’ by Francesco Patrizi da Cherso”, Nou- cian, 1892) and L’Occulte catholique (The Cath-
velles de la République des Lettres 1 (1985), 67-91 ¢ olic occult, 1898). It was in the field of art that
P. Zambelli, “Anedotti patriziani”, Rimascimento II° Péladan was most successful in joining action
S., 7 (1967), 309-318 Website: http://core.ecu.edu/ with the intellectual life, by organizing the Salons
phil/ryane/fphp.htm (dedicated to F.P.].
de la Rose-Croix, extravagant shows appealing to
high society which began in 1892 and featured
JEAN-PIERRE BRACH
most of the symbolist painters of the time: Felicien
Rops (1833-1898), Alexandre Séon (1855-1917),
Péladan, Joseph-Aimé (Joséphin), Armand Point (1860-1932), Fernand Khnopff
28.3.1858 Lyon (Rh6ne), + 27.6.1918 (1858-1929), Odilon Redon (1840-1916), Jean
Neuilly-sur-Seine Delville (1867-1953), Emile-Antoine Bourdelle
(1861-1929), Felix Vallotton (1865-1925), Charles
Descending from a Protestant family of the Filiger (1863-1928), and the composer Erik Satie
Cévennes that had converted to Catholicism, (1866-1925). Only Gustave Moreau (1826-1898)
Joséphin grew up in Lyons in the zealous atmos- remained aloof. Péladan inaugurated this “aes-
phere of recent converts. His father, Louis-Adrien thetic exploit” in the extravagant costume of
(1815-1890) was a publicist in the legitimist news- Grand Master of the Ordre de la Rose Croix du
papers, specializing in the interpretation of prophe- Temple, and adorned with the Babylonian royal
cies that linked the return of the king, the Grand title of “Sar”. A quarrel with his financial backer,
Monarque, to the secret of the end of time. His Antoine de La Rochefoucauld, whom he had made
writing of a rejoinder to Renan’s (1823-1893) Life a high dignitary of the order, put an end to this
of Jesus earned him a papa! decoration and the enterprise, precipitated by another break: that of
right to the title of Chevalier. Péladan Sr. passed on Péladan with the Ordre Kabbalistique de la Rose-
this vision of an exalted, exotic Catholicism to his Croix which he had created along with > Stanislas
two sons. Adrien (1844-1885), the elder, was a de Guaita. Fidelity to the Church, of which Péladan
polygraph interested in Chinese philology, botany, claimed to be an obedient son, had motivated this
and homeopathic medicine. According to Joséphin, attitude, but it did not prevent him from claiming
who admired him enormously, Adrien was the last to exercise a spiritual authority even over the
holder of the initiation of the Rose-Croix of clergy, based on the distinction between what
Toulouse, and it was he who interested his younger belonged to occult science, the domain of the
brother in occultism [- occult/occultism] and magus, and what belonged to religion in the strict
Hermetism [> Hermetic Literature]. In 1870 the sense. > Magic, according to the Sar, combined the
family moved to Nimes, where Joséphin discovered concepts of > Eliphas Lévi with the eschatological
art and literature, which induced him, as it did prophecy developed by Péladan Sr. Joséphin
most of the occultists of his time, to try his luck in Péladan’s contribution to the field of esoteric
the Parisian literary world in 1881. thought was slight, but he had decided literary

--- Page 363 ---
939 PERATES
gifts, and his works were a publishing success up admits of infinite divisions. The first division is the
to World War I, though unfortunately marred by “trias”; and the first, unbegotten part of this trias
his provocations and extravagances that made is called the perfect good, the “fatherly greatness”
him an easy prey to columnists and caricaturists. (megethos patrikon). The second, “self begotten”,
He died during the war from food-poisoning, at part is an infinite multitude of powers, while the
the moment when, returning to the interpretation third, “begotten” part is called special (idikon).
of prophecies, he was proclaiming his country’s This trias with its second self-generating principle
victory. seems to cite a metaphysical scheme which also
occurs in other Gnostic and Neoplatonic texts (cf.
Le Vice supréme, Paris: Librairie des auteurs mo- Pistis Sophia 2,2£./24,38f. [ed. Schmidt-Till]; Por-
dernes, 1884 # La décadence esthétique: le salon de phyrius, fr. 223F [ed. A. Smith]). Each compart-
J. Péladan, toé année. Avec l’instauration de la Rose-
ment of this tripartite kosmos has its own gods,
Croix esthétique, Paris: Dentu, 1891 ¢ Amphithéatre
minds, men etc. In the days of Herodes, Jesus
des sciences mortes I: comment on devient mage,
éthique, Paris: Chamuel, 1892 ¢ Constitution de la Christ, who is of three natures, three powers and
Rose-Croix, le Temple et le Graal, Paris: Au secrétariat, three bodies, has descended into this world from
1893 ¢ Amphithéatre des sciences mortes V: l’occulte the first unbegotten part of the kosmos. Through
catholique, mystique, Paris: Chamuel, 1898. his descent he wishes to save and restore every-
thing, i.e. all the seeds (spermata) that have been
Lit.: Christophe Beaufils, Joséphin Péladan: Essai sur
brought down from the first two parts of the kos-
une maladie du lyrisme, Grenoble: Jér6me Million,
mos into the lowest and third part. This third part 1993 @ Ed. Bertholet, La pensée et les secrets du Sar
Joséphin Péladan, Lausanne: Editions rosicruciennes, of the kosmos, they say, will perish, whereas the
1952, 4 vols. # Jean-Pierre Laurant & Victor Nguyen other two parts are not subject to corruption
(eds.), Les Péladan, les Dossiers H, Lausanne: |’Age (V, 12). In V, 14, Hippolytus seems to quote ver-
d’Homme, 1990. batim from a book called the Proasteioi up to
aether. It is difficult to make any sense of either
JEAN-PIERRE LAURANT the extended quotation or the title; it seems to
deal with heavenly powers, winds and stars that
Perates influence the life below. In V, 16-17, Hippolytus
provides additional information about the Peratian
The Perates are a gnostic group whose name is doctrine: it amounts to a sustained scripture-based
first mentioned by > Clement of Alexandria (Stro- meditation on this world of corruption and on
mateis, VII, 108, 2). Hippolytus identifies two the possibility of escape from it. Kronos is the
otherwise unknown persons as their founders power that rules over generation and destruction.
(Refutatio, V, 13, 9): Akembes (IV, 2, 1; Kelbes: V, The exodus story is allegorized: Egypt is the body,
13, 9; Ademes: X, 10, 1), who is called ho Karys- the Red Sea is a symbol of destruction (Kronos),
tios (Karystos is a town in Euboia), and Euphrates, the desert is a realm beyond generation, the
who is called ho Peratikos (also mentioned by Ori- dwelling place of both the gods of destruction and
gen, Contra Celsum VI, 28 as a teacher of the > the god of salvation (V, 16, 5). The serpent (Num.
Ophites). Clement opines that the name Perates is 21:8) which is subsequently identified with the
derived from their place of origin. Different sugges- wise word of Eve (Gen. 3:1ff.), the mystery of Eden,
tions have been discussed: Euboia, the Euphrates the river flowing out of Eden and the sign of Cain,
region, the Asiatic coast of the Hellespont (cf. le is a symbol of salvation. A radical reinterpretation
Boulluec, 433, note 221). Hippolytus seems to of salvation history is proposed: Cain is the hero
quote the Perates with an allegorical explanation whose offering the god of this world rejected in
of their self designation: it defines them as those favour of Abel’s bloody sacrifice. He is the one who.
who claim to move beyond (perasai) the realm of appeared as a man in the days of Herod and was
corruption (V, 16, I. 5. 6). born in the image of Joseph and Esau (V, 16, 9ff.;
Hippolytus maintains that the Perates derive cf. the > “Cainites” in Irenaeus, Adversus Haere-
their wisdom from the astrologers (V, 13); his ses, I, 31, 1-2). Jakob received the blessing of the
description of their doctrine in Refutatio V blind one, but later on he saw the face of Esau ‘as if
(Theodoret, Historia Ecclesiastica 1, 17 is a mere a man sees the face of God’ (Gen. 33:10). In V, 17,
rehearsal) has a peculiar structure. First, he intro- Hippolytus attempts a final sketch, according to
duces a system which focuses on the tripartite which the Peratian doctrine teaches three princi-
structure of the kosmos. There is one origin ples: Father, Son and Matter. The Son (who is
(arché), which is like a great source and which identified as the serpent, the salvific principle) is

--- Page 364 ---
PERATES 940
placed in the midst between Father and matter. He onwards he lived in the monastery of Saint-
takes the ideas/powers/types from the Father and Germain-des-Prés in Paris. His first publication, a
transmits them to matter. This Platonist model of translation of a German book on mathematics,
demiurgical creation is put into a soteriological appeared in 1743. It was followed shortly after
perspective: those who wake up and realize that by some pious treatises, including a Manuel béné-
they are from above, a type from the father, the per- dictin (1755, containing a.o. a commentary on the
fect copy, the consubstantial race, will return to the Rule of St. Benedict), and a Dictionnaire portatifde
father and thus be saved. peinture, de sculpture et de gravure (Portable Dic-
It is difficult to assess the authenticity of Hip- tionary of Painting, Sculpture and Graphic Arts;
polytus’ doxography: his section on the “Perates” 1757). His interests began to shift after he had
has parallels in other sections dealing with other found in the library of his monastery a work on >
gnostic groups. Some scholars, notably Salmon alchemy: the Histoire de la philosophie herme-
and Stahelin, came to the conclusion that Hippoly- tique, published in 1742 by Abbot Lenglet-Dufres-
tus derives his information about the Perates and noy, which inspired him to write his two most
other gnostic groups from a collection of forged famous works, Fables égyptiennes et grecques
documents. If this judgement is probably too pes- dévoilées et réduites au méme principe (Egyptian
simistic, Hippolytus’ sources still await a thorough and Greek Fables Unveiled and Reduced to the
and comprehensive exploration. Same Principle; 2 vols.) and Dictionnaire mytho-
hermétique (Mytho-Hermetic Dictionary) both
Lit.: G. Bareille, “Euphratés”, Dictionnaire de Théolo-
gie Catholique 5 (1924), 1521-1525 @¢ R. Baxmann, published in 1758. The latter is a combination of
“Die Philosophumena und die Peraten, eine Unter- a glossary and an index to the former, giving a list
suchung aus der alten Haresiologie”, Zeitschrift fir die of symbols, concepts and key-terms with expla-
historische Theologie 2 (1860), 218-257 # A. Hilgen- nations as well as references to his Fables. The
feld, Die Ketzergeschichte des Urchristentums, Leipzig: Fables, on the other hand, were written in a tra-
Fues, 1884 (reprinted Wissenschaftliche Buchgesell-
dition of alchemical works starting in the early
schaft: Darmstadt, 1963, Olms: Hildesheim, 1963,
Renaissance, coming to a head with > Michael 1966), 263-267 @ A. le Boulluec, La notion d’hérésie
dans la littérature grecque, II°-III° siécles (2 vols.), Maier’s Arcana arcanissima, hoc est Hieroglyphica
Paris: Etudes Augustiniennes, 1985 ¢ E. Legge (trans.), Aegyptio-Graeca (1614), and followed by such
Philosophumena or the Refutation of All Heresies works as > Athanasius Kircher’s Oedipus Aegypti-
(2 vols.), London & New York: MacMillan, 1921 ¢ acus (1653), and Jacob Toll’s Fortuita (1687). Per-
G. Salmon, “Euphrates (1)”, Dictionary of Christian nety heavily borrowed from these three books
Biography, 2 (1880), 296 idem, “The Cross-Refer-
in particular, but also added much of his own.
ences in the ‘Philosophoumena’”, Hermanthena 11
Throughout his book, Pernety interprets all mytho- (1885), 389-402 H. Stahelin, Die gnostischen
Ouellen Hippolyts in seiner Hauptschrift gegen die logical stories as coded descriptions of the alchem-
Hdretiker (Texte und Untersuchungen 6), Leipzig: ical Great Work, understood in its more “concrete”
Hinrichs, 1890 # A. Torhoudt, “Euphratés le Péra- operative aspect of chrysopoeia. This is the “single
tique”, Dictionnaire d'histoire et de géographie principle” mentioned in the title, to which all the
ecclésiastiques 15 (1963), 1414-1415 @ J. Whittaker,
myths can be reduced (see further discussion in
“Self-Generating Principles”, in: B. Layton (ed.), The
Faivre 1993). Both Fables and Dictionnaive soon Rediscovery of Gnosticism, vol. 1: The School of
Valentinus (Studies in the History of Religions, 41), became a standard reference in alchemy, a position
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1980, 176-193. they have enjoyed to the present day, thus popular-
ising the idea that the antique myths of Egypt and
WINRICH A. LOHR
Greece were entirely conceived by alchemists,
who wanted to cryptically describe the process
Perennialism — Tradition of metallic transformations which took place in
their laboratories. Since the Philosopher’s Stone
was supposed to represent the final accomplish-
Perennial Philosophy > Tradition
ment of such procedures, the latter had to be dis-
guised. What interested Pernety was not so much
Pernety, Dom Antoine-Joseph, the making of gold, but rather finding a universal
Mrg4 21716 Roanne, yf 16/1011 796 remedy for all illnesses. This passion for alchemy
Paris remains characteristic for most of Pernety’s life.
In 1763, Pernety left his monastery in order to
Little is known about Pernety’s early life. In 1732 travel as chaplain with L.A. de Bougainville on his
he entered the Benedictine Order, and from 1746 expedition to the Falkland Islands. Partly due to

--- Page 365 ---
941 PERNETY
that expedition, France officially took possession activity in Avignon between 1764 and 1772, due to
of the land in 1764, and on that occasion Pernety the activities of the Inquisition against Freema-
celebrated a mass there. He kept a detailed diary sonry during that period. Besides, the practise of
in which he described everything he encountered, hermetically inspired side degrees above the three
especially all kinds of plants and animals which symbolic ones is not documented in Avignon until
were new to him. He brought back a collection 1774. On the other hand, the rituals of the degrees
of them for the gallery of natural history in his of the Rite Ecossais philosophique, which evolved
monastery. He also recorded the medicines pre- out of the Rite Hermétique, do show affinity to the
pared by the Indians; later, in Berlin in the years ideas found in Pernety’s Fables. It could therefore
1769-1771, Pernety took a strong stand in favour be argued that the marquis d’Aigrefeuille, who is
of them, against the views defended by such now believed to have created the Rite Hermétique,
authors as Cornelius de Pauw, a believer in “pro- drew on some elements he found in the Fables. Like
gress” who saw the Indians as primitive compared the degrees of the Rite Hermétique, also the degree
to the Europeans. Conversely, Pernety — similar of Knight of the Sun, now known to have existed as
to Jean-Jaques Rousseau’s concept of the “noble early as 1751, is not likely to have been created by
savage” — saw in them the very proof of an original Pernety.
purity of mankind. In 1767 Pernety, aged fifty-one, arrived in Berlin;
Having lived so far from his monastery for a year and according to all his biographers he did not
and a half, he found it difficult to readjust himself, return to France until 1783. As soon as he arrived
and this may partly account for his subsequent in Berlin, Frederic The Great, King of Prussia, mis-
involvement in a reform movement within his taking him for his cousin Jacques, appointed him as
Order. In 1765, together with twenty-seven other his librarian and as a member of the Royal Acad-
monks, he submitted to the king a project designed emy of Berlin. In 1768 he was appointed Abbot of
to mitigate the severity of the Benedictine Rule. Burgeln (Saxony) by the Pope, but he kept spend-
The initiative failed miserably, and even resulted in ing most of his time in Berlin. At the Royal Acad-
Pernety being confined for a short time. Surpris- emy he read several essays, starting in 1769 with
ingly, he was nevertheless appointed as member of his attack on De Pauw, which was followed in
the committee composed of four monks, charged 1773 by an essay on > reincarnation, in which he
at that time with elaborating and submitting new defended the affirmative Pythagorean perspective.
constitutions for the monastery, a task to which he In 1776 he published a book on physiognomy,
devoted himself with zeal. But severe disagree- La connaissance de l’homme moral par celle de
ments arose among the four committee mem- homme physique (Knowledge of moral man by
bers, two of whom were rather conservative; as a knowledge of physical man), a subject which had
result, the more liberal-minded Pernety decided to recently become popular through the work of >
leave Paris. Lavater but on which Pernety had published
According to J.M. Ragon (Orthodoxie Magon- already earlier. Among other things he argued that,
nique, 1854), whose perspective has been widely before birth, souls are competing over the body of
adopted by handbooks of > Freemasonry, Pernety the new child. La connaissance proves that Pernety
first went to Avignon, where he arrived in 1766. was well acquainted with some of the so-called
Here he supposedly created a new Masonic Rite, “occult sciences”; but like his Observations sur les
the Rite Hermétique, consisting of six degrees maladies de l’ame (Observations on the maladies of
above the three symbolic ones; and one more the soul), published the next year, the book is also
degree added shortly afterwards, that of Knight of an inquiry into psychology and is part of his
the Sun, would be the origin of one of the current polemic in the Academy with Le Cat, from 1776 to
degrees of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite. 1778. In sum, during his first ten years in Berlin
But Ragon’s statements are extremely disputable. Pernety lived the life of a respected scholar. But
In 1996 a membership list was found of the Lodge then things changed.
“La Royal Yorck de l’Amitié”, existing in Berlin in Probably in 1779 or shortly before (although
1782, which mentions Pernety as a member who Pernety himself claimed a date as early as 1771), he
had received most of the higher degrees in France borrowed some works by > Emanuel Swedenborg
(Snoek 2003, 30). It is the only proof we have that from another scholar, who had received them from
Pernety was a Freemason, and since he did not the widowed Queen of Sweden, sister of the King
return to France between 1766 and 1783, we may of Prussia; and with the help of the brothers
conclude from it that he probably was one when he Auguste and Carl Frederic Nordenskjéld, and the
left Paris. Furthermore, there was no Masonic Swedish consul in London, Christophe Springer,

--- Page 366 ---
PERNETY 942
Pernety managed to get hold of some further writ- Presses Universitaires de France, 1987, 909-914; 3rd
ings by Swedenborg. He immediately enthused ed. 1991, 917-922 ¢@ J. Bricaud, Les Illuminés d’Avi-
gnon: Etude sur Dom Pernety et son groupe, Paris:
over the writings of the Swede, and started trans-
Nourry, 1927 (to be read with great caution) ¢ Antoine
lating two of them from Latin into French: Les
Faivre, The Golden Fleece and Alchemy, Albany: State
merveilles du ciel et de l’enfer et des terres plané- University of New York Press, 1993 (expanded ver-
taires et astrales was published in 1782, and La sion of the French ed., 1990), 47-52 # Sylvain Matton,
sagesse angélique sur l'amour divin et sur la sagesse “I’Egypte chez les ‘philosophes chymiques’, de Maier
divine in 1786, both in Berlin. Although Pernety a Pernety”, Les Etudes philosophiques 2/3 (1987)
did not consider himself a Swedenborgian (‘I am a 207-226 # Micheline Meillassoux-Le Cerf, Dom Per-
nety et les Illuminés d’Avignon, Milano: Arche, 1992 ¢
disciple of Jesus-Christ, and not of Swedenborg’,
Pierre Mollier, “Contribution a l’étude du grade de
he wrote in 1782), he was strongly influenced by Chevalier du Soleil — IV: Le Chevalier du Soleil et la
Swedenborgian ideas. Apart from these two trans- Maconnerie hermétique”, Renaissance Traditionnelle
lations, Pernety published only one more work 107/108 (1996), 231-246, esp. 240-242 @ Karl-Erik
after 1778. His main line of activity took on a dif- Sjodén, Swedenborg en France, Stockholm: Almovist
ferent direction: he became involved into a move- & Wiksell International, 1985, ch. 2 ¢ J.A.M. Snoek,
ment pertaining to what is known as > Illuminism. “Swedenborg, Freemasonry, and Swedenborgian Free-
masonry: An overview”, in: Mikael Rothstein &
In 1779 he became one of the first members of a
Reender Kranenborg (eds), New Religions in a Post-
group later known as the > Illuminés d’Avignon, modern World, Aarhus: Aarhus University Press, 2003,
and he soon moved on to a position of leadership. 23-75, esp. 28ff.
In 1783 Frederick II discharged him, albeit reluc-
tantly, from his professional obligations. Pernety, JAN A.M. SNOEK
now sixty-seven years of age, left Berlin in search
for a new dwelling place for his group. After his
Pessoa, Fernando, *13.6.1888 Lisbon,
arrival in Paris, Mgr. De Beaumont tried to per-
T 30.11.1935 Lisbon
suade him to reenter into his monastery, but after
many negotiations and a decree by the Parliament
Portuguese poet and esotericist. After the death
of Paris, Pernety received permission to continue
of his father when he was five years old, Pessoa’s
living as a secular priest. Eventually, he settled with
mother took him with her to Durban, South Africa,
his group in Avignon. In 1786, Pernety was secre-
where she settled with her new husband, the Por-
tary of the “Société Académique et Patriotique” of
tuguese Consul of that town. After high school,
Valence, and he again took up his earlier scholarly
Pessoa returned to Portugal, where he soon began
activities. Following the dispersion of the Illuminés
to work as a commercial correspondent in English
d’Avignon after 1792, Pernety seems to have
and French. He became involved in the Portuguese
returned from IIluminism and alchemy to his Bene-
modernist literary movement, publishing a consid-
dictine roots: his last book (1790) was about Mary,
erable number of poems, in Portuguese as well as in
and he authored another work, still unpublished,
English, in several short-lived reviews. The only
of Extraits des Epitres de saint Paul. Pernety died
book to be printed during his lifetime was Men-
16 October 1796, at the age of eighty.
sagem (1934). After Pessoa’s death, a trunk full of
manuscripts was found; they were written under
Dom Antoine-Joseph Pernety, Dictionnaire Mytho-
several “heteronyms”, i.e., literary personae who Hermeétique, dans lequel on trouve les Allégories Fab-
uleuses des Poetes, les Métaphores, les Enigmes et les wrote both poetry and prose, in a variety of styles.
Termes barbares des Philosophes Hermétiques, Paris: Each of them had been assigned a specific biogra-
Bauche, 1758, 2 vols., 2nd ed. 1787; Reprint of the phy of his own. The most important among them
1758 ed. (with anonymous introductory note and an were Alberto Caeiro, Alvaro de Campos, Ricardo
appendix with various documents by and from Per- Reis and Bernardo Soares. Pessoa is nowadays
nety), Milan: Arché, 1969 & 1971; Paris: Denoél,
considered one of the major poets of the zoth
1972 ¢ Les Fables Egyptiennes et Grecques Dévoilées
century. & réduites au méme principe, avec une explication des
hiéroglyphes, et de la Guerre de Troy, Paris: Delalain, Esotericism stands out as one of the most con-
2 vols., 1758; Milan: reprint Arché, 1971, 2nd ed. tinuous threads to be used when working our way
1786, Paris: reprint La Table d’Emeraude, 1982, with through Pessoa’s scattered works. About 1914,
an introduction by Sylvain Matton, 3rd ed. 1796 ¢ he began to attend the séances of — spiritualism
Extraits des Epitres de saint Paul par Dom Pernety,
organized by one of his aunts. Later on, in 1915, he
abbé de Burgeln (unpublished).
translated from English into Portuguese several
Lit.: Robert Amadou, “Pernety”, in: Daniel Ligou books by authors linked to the - Theosophical
(ed.), Dictionnaire de la Franc-Magonnerie, Paris: Society (> H.P. Blavatsky, > C.W. Leadbeater, >

--- Page 367 ---
943 PESSOA
Annie Besant). He was very much impressed by the This Supreme Being unfolds Himself in an infinity
theosophical doctrines, which he at first thought of theophanic manifestations. Angels belong to
were likely to open for him the doors of Mystery. one of these and are considered as guides, like in
Pessoa’s early poems (The Mad Fiddler; 1911- the Christian tradition. Pessoa declared himself a
1916) were written in English under the heteronym “gnostic Christian”, and was of the opinion that
Alexander Search. They were strongly influenced Catholicism did not give enough importance to the
by both the Elizabethan metaphysical poets and symbolic meaning of Christ’s life and death. A form
16th-century esoteric currents. Platonist as well as of Christian esotericism indeed lies at the core of
pantheistic elements had already left their imprint Pessoa’s religious thought and deeply influenced
on his philosophical thought, and this influence his poetry. A cosmology tinged with elements bor-
would remain through the rest of his life. Pessoa rowed from gnostic traditions pervades his First
was keenly interested in > astrology, a field in Faust, a work which is embedded in dualism and
which he reached considerable expertise. The evinces a pluralistic notion of the Godhead. Fate
English magician > Aleister Crowley paid him a stands out above all the other gods. Christ is con-
visit in 1930, after an exchange of letters bearing sidered as one of these gods, in what Pessoa refers
on astrology. While in Portugal, Crowley, with Pes- to as “Supreme Polytheism” - a perspective that
soa as an accomplice, hoaxed people into believing corresponds, at a metaphysical level, with the plu-
that he had vanished, in a rocky place near the sea ral quality of life itself. Such a system also ties up
called Mouth of Hell — an event which stirred a with the psychological multiplicity which lies at
great sensation. the heart of Pessoa’s poetic creation. He was and
Mensagem, the most famous of Pessoa’s works, staunchingly remained in search of some kind of
can be seen as a crucible, as it were, in which vari- philosophical cementing anchorage which might
ous elements of an esoteric character — rosicrucian help him to integrate the different parts of his self.
{> Rosicrucianism], gnostic [~ Gnosticism], alche- Pessoa’s metaphysical quest was centered in the
mical [> Alchemy] etc. — are welded together. It great mystery of God and Life, and his poetry was
also contains a very elaborate form of Portuguese the main instrument of that search for a “final
messianism, known more specifically as Sebastian- truth”. Tremendum and fascinans at the same time,
ism. It has its roots in the history of King Sebastian, mystery is ‘the Absolute Voice, the Voice Without
who disappeared on a Moroccan battlefield in Mouth’ (Poems, published under the heteronym
1578. The myth of his impending return, linked to Alvaro de Campos), in whose depths the poet
the restoration of Portugal’s glory, is one of the tends towards his own annihilation: ‘I dissolve
most fertile myths in Portuguese culture. Men- myself in darkness and universe’ (First Faust). Pes-
sagem bears witness to the fact that poetry was for soa describes a mystical experience, full of terror
Fernando Pessoa a form of initiation, a quest into and despair, of a descent into the Abyss: ‘And
that realm of the Unknown which throughout his silently I receive / the mystery and horror of the
life he struggled to reach. It also shows that he tried world / In my deep abyss’ (ibid.). This experience,
to turn his literary work into an Opus magnum. which he calls his ‘supreme intuition’, was for him
For him a man of genius was “an initiate of the left- a source of great anguish and melancholy. Gradu-
hand”, like Shakespeare and perhaps he himself. ally, the poet’s life ‘became a metaphysical fever,
He beautifully defined initiation as ‘admission to while he constantly discovered occult meanings in
the conversation of the Angels’ (a clear reference to things, and played with the fire of mysterious
Crowley, whose influence on Pessoa has tradition- analogies’ (Book of Disquietude, published under
ally been underestimated). the heteronym Bernardo Soares). From time to
Pessoa was also familiar with a number of time the experience is interrupted in order for the
esoteric orders. He carefully studied masonic [> mind and soul to rest: ‘In the shade of Mount
Freemasonry] rituals and symbols, even though he Abiegnus /I rested from meditating. / On the top of
was not himself a Freemason. In a number of news- it, I saw the high castle /Which I dreamt to reach’
paper articles published in 1935 he publicly took (Poems). Pessoa was convinced that “Unknown
the defense of Masonry and other secret societies, Superiors” were leading him towards spiritual and
against the attempts of the Portuguese government literary achievement, but some form of neurotic
to outlaw them. inertia prevented him from successfully carrying
In Pessoa’s poetry, God appears as a ‘vision that through most of his projects.
won’t be seen’ (Beyond God): He is the Unknown
of an apophatic mysticism (Being, Universe, Not- Poesias de Alvaro de Campos, Lisbon: Atica, 1964 ¢
Being is the triple manifestation of the Unknown’). Mensagem, Lisbon: Atica, 1967 # Poesias, Lisbon:

--- Page 368 ---
PESSOA 944
Atica, 1967 @ Livro do Desassossego por Bernardo that the truth was quite the contrary: he was
Soares, Lisbon: Atica, 1982 # Obra Poética e em accused of heresy by the Inquisition of his time
Prosa, Porto: Lello e Irmao, 1986 @ Fausto, Tragédia (1304-1315) because he denied the existence of
subjectiva (Fragmentos), Lisbon: Presenga, 1988 ¢ demons and spirits, condemned ceremonial and
Translations into English: Sixty Portuguese Poems
necromantic astrological practices based on the (EE.G. Quintanilha, trans.), Cardiff: University of
Wales Press, 1973 ¢ Selected Poems (Jonathan Griffin, construction of images and > amulets, so much so
trans.), New York: Penguin Books, 1982 ¢ Always that his position seemed to be a refutation of the
astonished: Selected Prose (Edwin Honig, trans.), San Supernatural; and above all because he supported
Francisco: City Lights Books, 1988 ¢ Poems of Fer- the horoscope of religions, holding that the re-
nando Pessoa (Edwin Honig and Susan Brown, trans.), population of the world after the universal Flood
San Francisco: City Lights Books, 1998.
was not due to the miracle of Noah’s Ark, but to
Lit.: Ana Maria Binet, L’Esotérisme dans l’aeuvre de a natural phenomenon. In the medical field, he
Fernando Pessoa, Bordeaux: diss. Université Michel de denied that melancholy was the work of the demon
Montaigne, 1996 ¢ idem, “Loin au-dela des mers ou la and explained it through excess cf the humor of
Mer Absolue de Fernando Pessoa”, in: Voies / Voix black bile.
Océaniques, Lisboa: Lidel, 2000 ¢ idem, “La poétique
Peter was in fact a rationalist astrologer, physi-
du secret chez Fernando Pessoa”, in: Dire le secret,
Bordeaux: Presses universitaires de Bordeaux, 2001, cian, and philosopher in the Aristotelian-Avicenn-
261-277 ¢ idem, “Sébastianisme et Cinquiéme Empire: ian tradition [> Avicenna], who did not believe
Reflet d’un mythe eschatologique dans la littérature that the planets were spirits, but rather saw them as
portugaise”, La fin des temps Il, Bordeaux: Université superior physical bodies which move and influence
Michel de Montaigne, 2001, 83-99 # Robert Bréchon, earthly beings in a natural way, particularly con-
Etrange étranger, Paris: Bourgois, 1996 ¢ Yvette K.
cerning the course of maladies and human health.
Centeno, Fernando Pessoa e la Filosofia Hermética,
In > astrology, Peter kept to a mathematical, phys- Lisbon: Presenga, 1985 ¢ idem, Fernando Pessoa:
O Amor, A Morte, A Iniciacgao, Lisbon: A Regra do ical, rational doctrine that related the most impor-
Jogo, 1985 « idem, Hermetismo e Utopia, Lisbon: tant events, such as the rise of religious faiths, to
Salamandra, 1995 # Yvette K. Centeno & Stephen the great conjunctions; he believed neither in mira-
Reckert, Fernando Pessoa: Tempo, Solidao, Herme- cles nor in the biblical story of Noah’s Ark and the
tismo, Lisbon: Moraes, 1978 # Antonio Pina Coelho, re-population of the world after the Flood. He was
Os Fundamentos Filosoficos da obra de Fernando
called before the Inquisition for this doctrine,
Pessoa, Lisbon: Verbo, 1971 # George Monteiro (ed.),
The Man who never was: Essays on Fernando Pessoa, which was considered a refutation of the supernat-
Providence: Gavea-Brown Publications, 1982 ¢ Marco ural and of the religious verities connected with
Pasi, “The Influence of Aleister Crowley on Fernando that spiritual plane. Besides, the astrological deter-
Pessoa’s Esoteric Writings”, in: Richard Caron, minism which could be connected with his doctrine
Joscelyn Godwin, Wouter J. Hanegraaff & Jean-Louis of astral causality seemed to deny the liberty of the
Vieillard-Baron (eds.), Esotérisme, gnoses & imagi-
individual. It seems, however, that he was only
naire symbolique: Mélanges offerts a4 Antoine Faivre,
accused, not condemned, thanks to the interven- Louvain: Peeters, 2001, 693-711 @ José Augusto
Seabra, Mensagem: Poemas esotéricos, Madrid: CSIC, tion of a Pope, perhaps John XXII, who saved him
1993- from the original charges of heresy.
After his studies in Padua and Paris between
ANA MARIA BINET
1270 and 1285-1290, Peter went to Constantino-
ple, and was also in Sardinia during those years.
Peter of Abano (Pietro de Sclavione), In 1295 he was in Paris, where he completed his
‘Yeani nse Paduayy after 13.15 Compilatio physiognomiae. Nothing is known
place unknown about his Parisian sojourn but what can be drawn
from the explicit of this work. According to Nardi,
Pietro de Sclavione, son of Costanzo de Peter was still in Paris in 1298, where he suppos-
Sclavione, Notary of the Seal of the Commune of edly met > Ramon Llull (Nardi 1958, 20). In 1302
Padua, was born circa 1250. Nothing of him is he returned to Padua. During his Paris period he
known after 1315. His fame as a physician and had been accused of heresy by the Dominicans of
astrologer alternates between fact and legend. The the Monastery of Saint-Jacques. In 1304, still in
legendary part is due to authors of the r5th-r7th Padua, where he was teaching philosophy, astrol-
century (~ Agrippa, Trithemius, Gianfrancesco ogy, and medicine in 1306, he was again accused of
Pico, ~ Symphorien Champier, and others), who “haereticae pravitatis”. From 1303-1310, as he
created a false image of him as a magus and necro- himself states, he revised his principal works: Con-
mancer. Historical documents have established ciliator differentiarum philosophorum et medico-

--- Page 369 ---
945 PETER OF ABANO
rum; Lucidator dubitabilium astrologiae; and De lide with it); or whether the order is that of Aristo-
motu octavae sphaerae. In the year 1314 he was tle, for whom the moon is immediately beneath the
Reader in medicine or physica at Treviso, even sun, hence the order being moon, sun, Venus, Mer-
though salaried by the University of Padua. In cury, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn.
1315 he was accused of heresy for the last time; (5) Whether the spheres number eight, nine, or ten.
it is not known with certainty whether he was Peter affirmed that there are only nine, and that the
condemned, nor what the accusations were. On introduction of the tenth sphere is of a religious and
May 24, 1315, he made a profession of faith and theological nature, inasmuch as this heaven is the
conformity with the Christian religion. Thereafter place of Paradise; thus the tenth sphere is not
we have no more evidence of him. astronomical, hence unnecessary and pointless
In his most important astronomical-astrological (another censurable thesis).
writings, Lucidator dubitabilium astrologiae and Unfortunately the work was not completed. It
De motu octavae sphaerae, Peter summarized and should have continued with a study of the apparent
discussed all the principal problems of astronomy motion of the sun, of which nothing has come
from the time of Ptolemy up to his own time, down to us but a few titles: whether the sun’s dec-
including the elaborations of the Arab astronomers lination is 24° or otherwise; whether the aux of the
(Alpetragio, Albattani, Thabit, and Arzakel), and sun is mobile or immobile; whether the center of
sought to answer them. The most notable problem the sun’s eccentric is 2° 23” distant from the earth,
concerned the precession of the equinoxes, or the or whether its equation is different; whether the sun
apparent movement of the eighth sphere, due to moves with its eccentric in 365 1/4 days.
which the equinox no longer fell on the 21st of Among Peter’s medical works, the famous ones
March, as fixed in the Christian calendar of the are the Problemata; a treatise De venenis which cir-
Council of Nicea (323), but by 1310 fell between culated widely, also in Italian translation; and the
March rath and 13th. Preliminary to all the prob- translation from the Greek of certain important
lems were the questions of whether astrology was, pharmacological works, including Dioscorides’s
or was not, a certain, licit, and permissible science, De materia medica, some of Galen’s works (De
and at what points it intersected with astronomy. complexione temperata), and the Pseudo-Hippo-
The questions were as follows: cratic De medicorum astrologia.
(1) Whether to attribute the diurnal motion to the Peter attempted to change the conceptual model
primum mobile or ninth heaven, while the eighth of astronomical science from being merely specula-
heaven, or firmament, was left to depend solely on tive (as Aristotle insisted) and divorced from the
the precessional motion. This would refute the practical, operative sphere. On the contrary, Peter
abstruse theory of the Andalusian astrologer underlined the close link between the theoretical
Arzachel (roth century) of the “trepidation of the and practical aspects which exists in all sciences,
equinoxes”, or their oscillation forward and back- from astronomy to medicine. As a faithful inter-
ward: a doctrine first developed in the school of preter of Ptolemy, he thought that the only certain
Thabit Ben Qurra (g9th-1oth century). science is mathematics, considered as geometry
(2) Whether one should accept the eccentric and astrology. The latter represents the practical
and epicyclic models: whether the variations of aspect of the geometrical knowledge of the celestial
motion — accelerations, retrogrades, and stationar- motions; it is a theory of the significances of the
ies — of the faster planets were better explained by physical influences of the heavens, hence should
Ptolemy’s eccentric and epicyclic models, or by the be a theory of the “sufficient”, not necessary, causes
homocentric spheres, 27 in all, of Eudoxus and that produce phenomena. Astrological foresight
Callippus, and the 55 revolving spheres of Aristo- also resembles medical prognosis, because the indi-
tle. This complicated theory is known only through vidual’s physical condition, his health and sickness,
Simplicius’s Commentary on the second book of depend on the planetary constitution, on the basis
Aristotle’s De Caelo. Peter followed Ptolemy, of his nativity drawn up in the iudicium (astrologi-
against Eudoxus, Callippus, and Aristotle. cal prediction or horoscope). Astrology, therefore,
(3) The problem of whether the planets are like is a general doctrine concerned with the sufficient
nails fixed at the center of the sphere, as Aristotle celestial causes, which in turn explain the causes of
says, or whether they rotate freely, as Peter the ens fore or futurum. Medicine is the science of
maintains. the ens in facto perfecto, that is, of what is “cur-
(4) The order of the planets: whether the sun is in able” or expects to be cured once the medical fore-
the fourth place above the moon, rather than next sight (prognosis), on which the cure is based, has
to it (in which case Venus and Mercury would col- taken place and has announced recovery.

--- Page 370 ---
PETER OF ABANO 946
Astrology is thus a physico-mathematical science: Dei). God is the supernatural agent (agens super-
primary, certain (because it has a mathematical naturale) because he acts without movement or
certainty and in that sense is not coniecturativa), change (absque motu et transmutatione); his action
unique, noble, licit, and a subiecto determinata; in is immediate and hence miraculous. Beneath divine
fact, its substratum, the swbiectum, is the heavenly causality there is the secondary, natural causality,
body “sufficiently” considered, in reference to its which acts in a threefold manner. The terms Peter
power of being “applied” to the terrestrial world or uses are not “cause” but “action” (actio), “virtue”
of applying itself, i.e., influencing the earth. Astrol- (virtus), “impression” (impressio), “influence”
ogy is licit and not superstitious; Peter follows the (influxus), and “sign” (significatio), following a
speculative direction of the author of the Speculum tradition that stems from Albumasar’s works
astronomiae, perhaps ~ Albertus Magnus. Like which he often cites. The first type of action is a
him, Peter rejects the necromantic techniques of universal one, distinct from the single, particular
invoking spirits through figures and the planetary action; between them stands the median cause. The
images of Hermes, Thabit, and other interpreters of natural, universal action acts only by means of
the magical doctrine of electiones and interroga- movement and light, and belongs to the eighth
tiones, as he affirms in the first debate or chapter of sphere of the fixed stars; it is uncertain and
his Lucidator. Like the author of the Speculum indefinite, like the number of the stars. The second
astronomiae, Peter considers as acceptable only the type of action (median) is either that due to the con-
investigation of those astrological images, such as stitution and aspects of the planets, or that due to
Ptolemy’s, which are purely physico-astronomical, the contracted virtue of the 48 celestial images. The
and not animistic. third type of celestial action is the particular or
The modifications introduced into Ptolemaic and individual one: it is a matter of a particular stellar
Hermetic astrology by the Speculum astronomiae influence (influxus stellaris particularis), which
and accepted by Peter allowed him to safeguard depends on the position of the planets in the celes-
individual liberty, because the science of astrologi- tial “houses” (domus) and their aspecting of each
cal foresight, according to him, is founded on other. This is found in the “nativity” (horoscope),
causes that do not absolutely necessitate but merely which is bound to the revolution of the planets at
incline, thus freeing astrology from the magical the day, the hour, and the exact place of the per-
aspects that according to Thomas Aquinas made son’s birth. It is also closely bound to the elemen-
it a superstitious and illicit doctrine. It is licit tary combination and the virtue of the place in
because it is founded on the rational, physico- which the influx is concentrated, with the contri-
mathematical rules of the planetary movements. bution of the parents to the birth of individuals.
These are not spirits and demons to be invoked, Thus there is a perfect correspondence between the
which would seem like pagan astrolatry. Thus elementary qualities and the celestial qualities of
Peter represented the same rationalist direction the astronomical images made by the constella-
in astrology as Aquinas did, contemporaneously, tions of the upper and lower hemispheres (36 plus
in theology. Indeed, since the verdicts of Paris the twelve signs, hence 48 in all). These correspond
(1277), condemned some of Saint Thomas’s ratio- to the terrestrial qualities in a physico-natural
nalist theses, it is no wonder that the Dominicans interaction or exchange.
of Saint-Jacques accused Peter’s medico-cosmolog- This institutionalized teaching of astrology, con-
ical rationalism of heresy. The circumstances of solidated by Peter, was imparted not only in Italy
Peter’s accusations of heresy need to be placed in at Bologna, Padua, and Ferrara, but also at the
their historical context, if they are to be rightly College de Maitre Gervais in Paris and at Merton
understood. College in Oxford. Here John Aschenden (or
It follows that astrology forms the scientific basis Eschenden), active between 1340 and 1370, wrote
of medicine, whose object is an ens possibile, a several works of universal astrology, including the
“curable” being, which represents the aim of med- Summa astrologiae de accidentibus mundi (pub-
icine and which depends on the inclinations that lished Venice 1489) and the universal Pronostica-
the stars have placed in the individual’s physical tiones of the great conjunctions of the three higher
constitution. The physician’s task is to discover planets and the eclipse of the moon in 1345. The
these, with the result that medical prognosis is Summa astrologiae, together with the Pronostica-
always an astrological prognosis. tiones of the great conjunctions of 1358 and 1365,
Natural celestial causality does not exclude, but opened the way for the success of universal predic-
rather presupposes the supernatural causality of tions based on the appearance of eclipses, or the
God, who governs the world through his will (zutu advent of great conjunctions of the slow planets.

--- Page 371 ---
947 PHILIPPE
The legend of the life and work of Peter as a Florence, Naz., Palatino, lat. 1022, ms 16th cent.,
magus and necromancer began to circulate in the ff. r88v-214v; Citta del Vaticano, Reg. lat., 1115, ff.
16th century, accredited by tales of Gianfrancesco 97r-114¢.
Pico della Mirandola and others. Gianfrancesco,
Lit.: G. Federici Vescovini, Introduction to the edition of
in De rerum praenotione said that Peter was given Lucidator dubitabilium astronomuiae, Padua, 1992, 2nd
to practicing magic in Constantinople, and the ed., xxxv+52 (with a detailed bibliography) ¢ idem,
same is stated by Symphorien Champier (Amnota- “Peter of Abano and Astrology”, in: Patrick Curry (ed.),
menta, errate et castigationes in Petri Aponensis Astrology, Science and Society, Woodbridge, 1987, 19-
Opera per Simphorianum Champerium, Giunta: 40 ¢ B. Nardi, “Intorno alle dottrine filosofiche di Pietro
d’Abano”, in: Saggi sull'aristotelismo padovano dal sec-
Venice 1520). The Libro dei sogni of Paolo
olo XIV al XVI, La Nuova Italia: Florence, 1958, 1-69
Lomazzo (1538-1600) includes the figures of spir- ¢ G. Naudé, Apologie pour toutes les grandes person-
its who speak to him and tell tales: it has Peter in nages qui ont été faussement soupconnez de magie, The
dialogue with Cecco d’Ascoli about all the necro- Hague: A. Lulac, 1653 ¢ G. Piaia, “Uimmagine di Pietro
mantic practices and demonic invocations. Thus d’Abano nella storiografia del Seicento”, in: Vestigia
the legend was established. Magical works spuri- philosophorum, Rimini: Maggioli Editore, 1983, 199-
232 ¢L. Thorndike, “Peter of Abano”, in: A History ofously attributed to Peter circulated in the 16th and
Magic and Experimental Science, vol. 2, New York:
r7th centuries: an Alchimia, the Profezie in Latin
Columbia University Press, 1923, 874-946 ¢# idem,
and Italian; works on necromancy and magic such “Peter of Abano”, Bulletin of the History of Medicine,
as the Elementa magica which appeared in many 15 (1944), 201-219 ¢@ L. Tieck, Pietro von Abano: Eine
copies of the 16th and 17th centuries, when, Zaubergeschichte, in: Marchen und Zaubergeschichten,
despite Naudé’s defense of him against the accusa- 1825.
tions of magic, the legend grew of a Peter who GRAZIELLA FEDERICI VESCOVINI
trafficked with demons. According to Naudé, Peter
was not the author of a magical work entitled Hep-
Petric’, Frane > Patrizi, Francesco
tameron that was published at the end of the first
book of Agrippa’s work; Trithemius accepted the
idea that Peter had also authored an Eleucidarium Philippe, Anthelme-Nizier, known
necromanticum Petri de Abano and a Liber exper- as “Maitre Philippe”, * 2.4.1849
imentorum mirabilium de anulis secundum 28 Loisieux (Savoy), tT 2.8.1905 l’Arbresle
mansionibus Lunae, all of them spurious. (near Lyon)
Another factor that contributed greatly to
the legendary character of Peter as a magus and “Thaumaturge”, “unknown master”, “spiritual
impostor was the story by Ludwig Tieck (Berlin, inaster”, “man of God”, “friend of God”: thus his
1773-1853) entitled Pietro d’Abano: Eine Zauber- disciples and admirers referred to the man they
geschichte (Pietro d’Abano: A Story of Magic), respectfully addressed as “Monsieur Philippe” or,
published in 1825 in the almanac Mdarchen und later on, “Maitre Philippe of Lyons”. Since he him-
Zaubergeschichten, in which the authentic image self wrote nothing but a few cursory letters, the
of Peter as a rationalist astrologer, physician, and available information about him derives from these
philosopher dissolved into that of a practitioner of disciples, apart from a few newspaper articles and
black magic. police reports, mostly malevolent and not very
trustworthy. Born in a town in Savoy (then part of
Tractatus de venenis, Mantua, 1472, 1473 Compila- the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia), he died at
tio physionomiae, Padua, 1474, Venice, 1548 # Con- ’Arbresle, near Lyons, where he usually resided; he
ciliator differentiarum philosophorum et medicorum,
was buried at Lyons, in the Loyasse Cemetery,
Venice: ed. Gabriel Tarvisiense, 1476; Venice: Giunta,
where his tomb has remained the constant object of 1565 # Expositio in librum Problematum Aristotelis,
Mantua, 1475, Padua, 1482, 1501 # Dioscorides de worship for a discreet cult. He was not, then, “of
materia medica, Colle Val d’Elsa, 1478 Astrolabium Lyons”, despite his sobriquet; however, having
planum (compilation by John Engel), Augsburg, 1488 arrived there at the age of fourteen, he only ever
¢ Lucidator dubitabilium astronomiae ed altre opere, left the region for short trips in France and other
ed. G. Federici Vescovini, Padua, 1988, 2nd ed., 1992, countries.
105-324 # De motu octavae sphaerae, ed. G. Federici
Philippe showed extraordinary characteristics
Vescovini, Appendix I to the critical edition of Lucida-
from his earliest years. According to a family tradi- tor dubitabilium astronomiae, Padua, 1988, 2nd ed.,
tion reported by Alfred Haehl (1959, 19), ‘when 1992, 347-365.
Pseudo-Peter of Abano, Spurious Magical Works, mss. his mother was expecting [his birth], she paid a
Padua, Bibl. del Seminario, 235, 17th cent., ff. 1-30v; visit to the Curé d’Ars, who revealed to her that

--- Page 372 ---
PHILIPPE 948
her son would be a very great being’. Philippe him- Philippe’s popularity came from his reputation
self affirmed that he had performed ‘miraculous for inexhaustible charity toward the humble and
healings... from the age of thirteen’ (Caillet needy, made possible by his wealthy marriage:
2000, 31). ‘Monsieur Philippe, he is the father of the poor’,
At fourteen he was sent to work at an uncle’s, proclaimed Papus (Encausse 1954, 64). His sole
who was a butcher at Lyon, and at the same time method of healing was prayer. Even when he let
pursued his studies at a religious school. During Papus persuade him to open a school of magnetism
1874-1875, he studied at the College of Medicine [> Animal Magnetism] at Lyons, the form of mag-
and Pharmacy to become an officer of health (i.e. a netism that he taught for three years, 1895 to 1898,
medical professional permitted to practice with- was singular in that he did not use any hand
out having obtained the title of doctor); but he motions or touches, only prayer. He repeated insis-
was expelled and disbarred for having cured some tently: ‘One always needs prayer’, adding, ‘I don’t
of the hospital patients who were supposed to do anything myself to heal you; I address the Mas-
serve as examples for the students. Thus began his ter, who is God’ (Haehl 1959, 62) - whom he also
controversial relationship with the official world happily called “the Friend”. But, he clarified, ‘to be
of medicine, which censured him on several other heard, you must .. . love your neighbor more than
occasions (in 1887, 1890, and 1892) for practicing yourself; do not judge your brother’. According to
medicine illegally. However, other physicians — ~ Sédir [Yvon le Loup], ‘he placed brotherly love
not confined to those in his immediate entourage, above all, above prayer and even above faith; it was
such as Dr. Gérard Encausse (~ Papus) and Dr. charity, he said, that engenders true faith and that
Emmanuel Lalande (Marc Haven, his future teaches us prayer; prayer without charity is facile,
son-in-law) — and some magistrates confirmed the and faith without charity, that’s not faith’ (Sédir
reality of his inexplicable healings, testified by 1923, I17-118).
numerous witnesses (1954, 43-46). Philippe did a great deal of oral teaching, and his
As early as age 20, Philippe had acquired a repu- disciples piously reproduced his talks, particularly
tation as a healer that would only increase with the Alfred Haehl. In Haehl’s collection Vie et Paroles
years and attract hordes of patients, from the hum- du Maitre Philippe (Life and Words of Master
blest to the noblest. The latter included princes of Philippe) these teachings are gathered under
royal blood and even monarchs, among them King the not incongruous title L’Evangile du Maitre
Edward VII of England, Kaiser Wilhelm II of Ger- Philippe (The Gospel of Master Philippe). In fact,
many, Emperor Franz Joseph of Austria, and the according to Sédir’s testimony (‘His doctrine was
Bey of Tunis. Of all his dealings, it was Philippe’s purely the Gospel’; 1923, 117) Philippe himself
association with the Russian court, from 1899 stated: ‘I do not tell you anything that goes against
until his death, that excited the most curiosity the Gospel’ (Encausse 1954, 264). He also pro-
(often malevolent) from the press, and the most claimed that ‘The Gospel contains all initiation’
agitated distrust from the police. Introduced into (ibid.). Sédir affirmed (1923, 117, 120) that ‘he
the Martinist [> Martinism: Second Period] en- condemned the practices of esotericism’ — i.e.
tourage of Tsar Nicolas II by Papus (who had occult practices, hypnotism, sorcery, > magic, and
established Martinist lodges in Russia in 1897, and the acquisition of powers, ‘as contrary to divine
created a Martinist Order there in 1899), Philippe law, not teaching them in any form and not recom-
made at least five journeys to Russia between 1901 mending their theories’. It seems that this was
and 1903. On one of them, he made the acquain- aimed mainly at the > Theosophical Society of >
tance of the famous thaumaturge, the future Saint Madame Blavatsky. In contrast, Philippe was
John of Cronstadt, who saluted him as “brother”. friendly towards the Martinist Order created by
For the rest of the time, the Russian aristocracy Papus in 1887-1891, which presented itself as a
thronged to consult him. From the moment of his “Christian chivalry”, and designed a medal and a
first interview with the imperial couple at Com- pentacle for it (Caillet 2000, 61). Sédir, following
piegne, in 1901, Philippe commanded the devotion his master’s teachings to the letter, took the same
of both the Tsar and the Tsarina. Up until his death, steps as had been taken a century before by >
in spite of intrigues and cabals, he was treated as a Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin: he resigned from all
friend and confidant by Nicolas and Alexandra, the numerous initiatic societies to which he had
to whom he had predicted the birth of the much- belonged, to devote himself to his only true Master
desired male heir. These intimate relations are and only true Friend, the Christ. Later, in July
described in detail by Philippe Encausse (1954, 1920, Sédir founded the Association of “Amitiés
67-113). Spirituelles” (Spiritual Friendships), which still

--- Page 373 ---
949 PICO DELLA MIRANDOLA
exists and has as its object the reunion of ‘all per- day to exercise a discreet but powerful influence
sons of good will who acknowledge Christ as upon spiritual seekers, both in isolation and in
the sole Master of their inner life, and the Gospel groups.
as the true law of conscience and of peoples’
Lit.: Serge Caillet, Monsieur Philippe, “Ami de(Encausse 1954, 129). Under the auspices of the
Dieu”, Paris: Dervy, 2000 ¢ Philippe Encausse, Le
Amitiés Spirituelles, in a collection entitled Ouel-
Maitre Philippe de Lyon: Thaumaturge et “Homme de
ques amis de Dieu (Some Friends of God, 1928),
Dieu”, ses prodiges, ses guérisons, ses enseignements,
Sédir published an anonymous piece fervently rsted. Paris: La Diffusion scientifique, 1954; 9th & last
dedicated to Philippe under the title Un Inconnu ed. in the author’s lifetime, Paris: Editions Tradition-
(An Unknown). Also anonymously, Mare Haven, nelles, 1980 @ Alfred Haehl, Vie et paroles du Maitre
Philippe’s devoted son-in-law, depicted Philippe Philippe, Lyon: Derain, 1959; new ed. Paris: Dervy,
in the character of > Cagliostro in his book Le 1980 @ Sédir, Quelques amis de Dieu, Bihorel-lés-
Rouen: Bibliothéque des Amitiés spirituelles, 1923;
Maitre inconnu Cagliostro (The Unknown Master
new ed. 1954.
Cagliostro, 1913). Later he confided to Philippe
Encausse: ‘I used a character who resembled him — JEAN-FRANCOIS VAR
Cagliostro — to write about him. Only friends will
understand’ (Encausse 1954, 47).
Philosophia Perennis > Tradition
Philippe’s influence on his disciples was decisive,
and caused a change of orientation in all of them
that Papus described thus: ‘You have brought me Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni,
to know and love Christ’ (Encausse 1954, 19). *1463 Mirandola, ¢ 17.11.1494
This orientation was implanted in the Martinist Florence
Order, of which Papus proclaimed: ‘Our Order
is Christian, essentially and integrally Christian, Born to the noble family of the Counts of Miran-
and one cannot conceive of a Martinist who is not dola and Concordia near Modena, Pico lived on
faithful to Christ’. Serge Caillet writes (2000, 140), the edge of two distinct cultural periods, the former
‘through Papus, Monsieur Philippe has influenced rooted in medieval scholasticism, the latter charac-
the Martinist Order, which he has helped to root in terized by the humanistic revival of classical
the tradition of Christian > illuminism’. Philippe’s thought. Pico’s strong curiosity led him to study
influence on Papus’s son, Philippe Encausse, was thoroughly both medieval and classical traditions
no less important, even though posthumous. The in the most renowned cultural centers of his age.
latter tells (1954, 128) that ‘Monsieur Philippe had His multifaceted interests in all kinds of knowl-
announced my birth to my parents (at a time when edge, his peculiar life, as well as his precocious
my dear young mother did not know she was preg- death constituted the basis for the rapid flourishing
nant). He had asked them to give me only one first of his fame and for the spreading of his legendary
name: Philippe. He wished, in effect, to be my spir- biography also beyond Italian borders.
itual godfather’. Philippe Encausse, born in Janu- Entering the University of Bologna around 1477
ary 1906, five months after Philippe’s death, was in order to study canon law, Pico quickly mani-
certain throughout his life that he was in commu- fested a specific talent for philosophy, which made
nication with his godfather and under his guidance. him turn his attention towards speculative sub-
He in turn labored to root in Christianity the Mar- jects. He moved to Ferrara and Padua, where he
tinist Order created by his father, which he himself attended the local Studia until 1482, when he left
revived in 1952. Throughout Philippe Encausse’s for Florence, where he became acquainted with >
term as Grand Master, as during Papus’s term, this Marsilio Ficino and his Neoplatonic circle. He was
Order devoted a veritable cult to the man who was in Paris in 1485, where, under the influence of the
considered its “Spiritual Master” or even, as Papus Sorbonne theologians, he composed his famous
said, its ‘almost invisible apostle’ (1954, 107). letter addressed to the humanist Ermolao Barbaro;
While Martinism declined after the death of in it, he pleaded in favour of the use of philosophi-
Philippe Encausse in 1984, it has gone down in the cal technical terminology against the accusations
history of occultist currents of the late r9th century of humanists such as Barbaro himself, who con-
as a movement that oriented ‘these questers of the sidered scholastic Latin a barbaric violation of the
occult, Papus, Haven, Sédir, Phaneg, and several purity of the Ciceronian language. This first impor-
others’ (Caillet 2000, 147) toward the simplicity tant work defines Pico’s position in the framework
of the “way of the heart” opened by Louis-Claude of the current humanistic debate between philol-
de Saint-Martin. In this regard, it continues to this ogy and philosophy. Pico’s defense of the latter is

--- Page 374 ---
PICO DELLA MIRANDOLA 25°
not to be seen as a reaction against contemporary several editions during the 16th century (the most
trends to revive classical Latin: on the contrary, his celebrated edition being the one that appeared in
early production, at least until 1487, does not show Basel in 1572, reprinted in the 17th century as well).
any sharp distinction between profound specula- The myth of the “phoenix of his age”, as the
tive contents and an eloquent prose founded on young Count was designated already by his con-
the most widely accepted Latin models of his con- temporaries, has affected scholarly interpreta-
temporaries. Later on, Pico would take a decisive tions of Pico’s intellectual speculation. Throughout
step, mostly devoting himself to philosophy and the centuries, Pico’s system of thought has been
rejecting his non-speculative production, including viewed as one of the earlier, more faithful, and
his poems. 1486 was a significant year for Pico: most complete expressions of humanism. Only in
he returned from Paris to Florence, subsequently recent years this interpretation has been subjected
moving to Arezzo (where he caused a scandal due to critical revision.
to his abducting a lady who had family ties with Of particular importance in this regard is the role
the Medicis), Perugia and Rome. In Perugia Pico played by theology in Pico’s attempt to create an
began his thorough study of Oriental languages all-comprehensive system of knowledge, intended
and Jewish kabbalistic doctrines [> Jewish Influ- to embrace and reconcile the most different
ences], which were used in his commentary on rational and religious disciplines. His project of
a platonic love poem by his friend Girolamo establishing a harmonious syncretism (concordia)
Benivieni (Commento sopra una canzona d’amore between various theological and philosophical
di Girolamo Benivieni), where for the first time his doctrines was certainly based upon intellectual
views of philosophical and religious concordance foundations. For this reason, modern scholars
were asserted. Simultaneously, Pico composed his have often considered Pico’s thought to have been
Conclusiones nongentae (Nine-hundred Conclu- a strongly mundane achievement; but a closer
sions, or Theses), meant to be publicly discussed in inspection of Pico’s texts allows us to perceive
Rome in 1487 and dealing with all fields of philo- how closely connected Pico was to contemporary
sophic and religious knowledge which the author Christian religious positions. As a matter of fact,
wanted to join in an all-comprehensive system. As all Pico’s speculation expresses his faith and will-
an Introduction to the hoped-for scholarly confer- ingness to adhere to Christian orthodox views,
ence on the Theses, Pico wrote an oration, later although some scholars have assumed that for
entitled De hominis dignitate (On the Dignity of a man whose work was suspect to the Roman
Man): an outstanding manifesto of the Renais- Church this was just a strategy in order to hide his
sance conception of the role played by man within real intellectual concerns. Nevertheless, his pro-
Creation. The harsh reaction of the Roman Church gram of universal salvation obtainable through
against Pico’s Theses — as a result of which the pub- an intellectual knowledge starts from an elitist
lic discussion never took place — led him to write an attitude, according to which esoteric doctrines are
Apologia in 1487, in which he tried to defend his the unique way for the initiate to better understand
position. After a brief detention in Paris, at the his relationship with nature and God.
Pope’s request, Pico settled in Florence. Under the Since the beginning of Pico’s quest for intellec-
patronage of Lorenzo de’ Medici, in 1489 he com- tual knowledge, he raised the question of which
posed here his Sevenfold Commentary on the Six boundaries are not to be overcome by the human
Days of Genesis (Heptaplus). {n 1492, while devot- intellect; and he did so on the basis of both classi-
ing himself to a commentary on the Psalms, which cal tradition and Christian authorities. We may
was to remain unfinished, the humanist dedicated assume that his clearly-defined interest in such an
to his frend Poliziano the short treatise De ente et issue — one which affected the entire age in which
uno (On Being and the One), in which he took up Pico lived - could have actually originated from
his project of highlighting the similarities between Pico’s stay in Padua, where he attended the local
platonic and aristotelian thought. Pico’s last years Studium in the academic years 1480-1481 and
were devoted to the composition of the huge Dis- 1481-1482. There he met the Jewish averroist
putationes adversus astrologiam divinatricem (Dis- philosopher Elijah del Medigo (ca. 1458-1497),
putations against Divinatory Astrology), which who probably initiated Pico into the averroistic
were left unfinished and represent a further apol- interpretation of Aristotle according to the Arabic
ogy and rejection of earlier unorthodox positions. tradition. Del Medigo, who translated several aver-
Most of Pico’s production was published only after roistic works from Hebrew into Latin on Pico’s
his death, firstly edited by his nephew, Gian- request, considered Aristotle “the father of all
francesco, in Bologna (1496), and later published in philosophers” and Averroes his most faithful com-

--- Page 375 ---
951 PICO DELLA MIRANDOLA
mentator. Moving from Averroes, Del Medigo ing to this distinction, the term Kabbalah was
sharply distinguished knowledge obtained through employed by the Jews to point out two distinct
faith from that gained through philosophical spec- hidden disciplines, one dealing with a method for
ulation. Despite Elijah’s attempt to bring Pico to combining letters of the Hebrew alphabet (such a
share his own attitude to rational speculation, the device, according to Pico, was not dissimilar from
young Count seems to have been inclined to follow > Ramon Llull’s Ars), the second dealing with an
a different path of research, the goals of which investigation of the celestial beings dwelling above
may appear in a letter sent by Del Medigo to Pico the sphere of the Moon; this second discipline was
in 1486. In this document the Jewish scholar considered by the humanist as the higher form of
responds to a previous letter, which has not come natural magic. Thus, if investigation of supernal
down to us, in which the humanist, among other entities could be carried out by means of natural
questions, asked for advice about the kabbalistic magic, this sort of kabbalistic magic would cer-
books which would have allowed him to delve into tainly allow the initiate to penetrate the mysteries
the hidden doctrines of the Jews. Although actually of the divinity of Christ. Following Ficino, Pico
revealing the titles of the most influential medieval wanted to establish a beneficent magic based on
kabbalistic treatises, Del Medigo, by means of ancient authorities (and in this perspective Kab-
rational discussion, tried in his response to deflect balah could then constitute a prisca theologia),
the humanist from adopting quasi-gnostic forms of which might involve the celebration of special ritu-
thought; for these, according to him, would lead als for summoning angels; in this manner the
Pico to create a neoplatonized Christian version human soul could be united with higher entities,
of Jewish Kabbalah. In Del Medigo’s epistle, as thus creating a path leading to Christ or directly
well as in a later Hebrew treatise entitled Behinat to God. In his approach to kabbalistic mysteries,
Ha-Dat (The Examination of Faith), the Jewish Pico highlighted the meaning of letters and angelic
scholar showed his contempt for those who assert names, widely employing mystical techniques
the existence of various ontological degrees within which were diffused within medieval Jewish milieus
God, and the possibility for man to affect and and were mostly available to the humanist through
change God’s perfection through prayer or magical Abraham Abulafia’s (1240-ca.1291) treatises
devices. translated into Latin by Flavius Mithridates. The
In spite of Del Medigo’s criticism against Kab- knowledge of the names of angelic powers like
balah, Pico probably realized he had found in this Metatron, Samael or Azazel would allow the kab-
Jewish lore one of the major links between rational balist magician, endowed with the necessary pre-
and religious systems of thought. In 1486, while requisites, to draw down into this world the
composing his famous Nine Hundred Conclu- positive virtues from the heavens and prevent the
sions, he resorted for the first time to a wide range malignant agents from harming the lower universe.
of Jewish kabbalistic works, which had been trans- Seen in this light, Pico’s kabbalistic doctrine would
lated on his request by the Jewish convert Flavius be a gnostic-hermetic discipline intended to inves-
Mithridates (ca. 1450-1489). As we have seen, Pico tigate a hidden God; such investigation was possi-
wanted to submit and discuss all his Conclusions ble through the power, given to the wise man, to
(which he had printed at the end of 1486) during comprehend a complicated system of links between
a conference to be held in Rome early in 1487. lower and higher degrees of reality, by means of a
A committee appointed by Pope Innocent VIII profound meditation on the value of alphabetic
stopped Pico’s plans, declaring that six of the the- letters and angelic names. Such an elitist attitude
ses were suspect and condemning seven others. leads to a particularistic salvation, although his
Most of the condemned Conclusions deal with doctrine was intended by Pico to eventually foster
Kabbalah. Pico immediately wrote his Apology in the collective redemption of mankind. According
order to declare his innocence, but the result of this to a recent interpretation (Copenhaver 1997), Pico
further attempt was that the Pope eventually would have envisaged the whole set of his 72 kab-
denounced all the theses. balistic Conclusiones secundum opinionem pro-
In one of the Conclusions condemned by the priam (Conclusions according to his [Pico’s] own
Church, Pico affirmed that ‘no knowledge gives us opinion) as a magic talisman, meant to keep the evil
more certainty about Christ’s divinity than magic Azazel away and bring the good Metatron closer to
and Kabbalah’. In order to defend this ambiguous the mundane world. If such a reading is correct, we
claim, Pico made an effort in his Apology to distin- could assume that Pico’s attempt to use Kabbalah
guish a good from an evil form of > magic, as well as a magic tool to bring about redemption is not
as a positive from a negative Kabbalah. Accord- dissimilar from the views of contemporary Spanish

--- Page 376 ---
PICO DELLA MIRANDOLA 52
Jewish mystics who produced the literary corpus of tion pertaining at the same time to natural philoso-
the Sefer ha-Meshiv (The Book of the Responding phy and to religion (Dulles 1941, 154).
[Angel]). Pico’s knowledge of Spanish kabbalistic Traces of such a belief can be inferred mainly
magic can probably be traced to the influence on from Pico’s Heptaplus, a commentary on the seven
him of Yohanan Alemanno (c. 1435-c. 1504), a days of God’s creation. Here the humanist inter-
Jewish scholar active in Florence in the last decades prets the book of Genesis as a scientific treatise con-
of the 15th century. taining elements of aristotelian natural philosophy
The problem arising from Pico’s use, within a (according to a rational type of biblical exegesis
rational system, of esoteric and non-rational doc- common among early Church Fathers, scholastic
trines such as the Jewish Kabbalah has been stud- authors, and medieval Jewish biblical scholars);
ied by modern scholars according to the most but at the same time, it is also seen as a prophetic
varied perspectives: the above-mentioned interpre- work, the truth of which proceeds in a straight line
tation is part of a more general trend of compre- from the divine revelation received by the priscus
hending Pico’s speculation as an attempt to philosophus ~ Moses. In the Heptaplus, we can
transcend physical limits to search for a superior observe a strong appeal to prophetic Kabbalah,
spirituality by means of occult kabbalistic tech- considered by Pico as a technique revealed to
niques aimed at the theurgical production of a spir- understand and control nature (Dulles 1941, 155-
itual descent of efflux from above. However, it is 156). In the same commentary, Pico highlights the
also possible to explain the humanist’s attitude in concept of a network of sympathies animating all
purely rational terms, if we maintain that the intel- nature: this concept, which was common in ancient
lect of the wise man is attributed the privilege of stoic and neoplatonic thought, was one of the
raising itself up to the degree of the Active Intellect, major focuses of Ficino’s speculation. Likewise,
where God’s grace will meet it and lead it to the Ficino’s thought was probably responsible for the
supernal realms of knowledge. A further scholarly discussion of man’s role within God’s creation at
approach is represented by those who think that the beginning of Pico’s Oration. There the author
Pico’s interest in Kabbalah was a mere hermeneuti- asserts the idea of man’s free choice of either rais-
cal and rhetorical device, intended to define a new ing himself up to God through the angels, or low-
kind of exegesis of the Christian texts, based on ering himself to the status of an animal. Is this God
Jewish tradition. as distant from man as the gnostic deus abscondi-
Here we will briefly discuss these views, which tus? Pico’s Conclusions could be read in such a
are all valid to some extent. If we assume, follow- manner, since (as is well known after Wirszubski’s
ing Garin’s approach, that Pico stressed philosophy magisterial studies on Pico’s encounter with Jewish
over religion, his interest in Kabbalah should be mysticism) the humanist’s impressive use of kab-
read as merely a search for an intellectual device balistic material based on Jewish theosophical
for overcoming the theory of the “double truth” tradition (and the diffusion of such material in
(which Pico could have derived from Averroes’ contemporary Tuscan milieus: see Idel 1983, Lelli
later interpreters, mainly through Elijah del 1997) made possible an understanding of God’s
Medigo’s teachings). This interpretation could be creation according to which a lower evil world is
supported on the basis of some passages of Pico’s sharply separated from a higher good world. Yet,
Commentary on Girolamo Benivieni’s Love Poem such a sharp distinction as in kabbalistic treatises is
(see Garin 1937, 464-465). However, even if we not evident in Pico’s Oration, while the Conclu-
admit that Pico originally intended to explore only sions can be interpreted in various ways.
the hermeneutic dimension of Kabbalah, it must be The close link between rational and non-
recognized that already the Commentary shows rational, or better philosophical and theological
traces of an understanding of Kabbalah as a science doctrines, according to either an averroistic or a
of hidden symbols, allowing man to reach an intel- kabbalistic reading, may be easily interpreted as
lectual gnosis of the mysteries of creation and the leading to a gnostic theology: only those wise men
Godhead. This attitude is more definitely expressed provided with intellectual knowledge from above
in the Oration on the Dignity of Man, where Pico’s (through a conjunction with the Active Intellect, or
resorting to hermetic passages dealing with the dis- by receiving an efflux directly from God) are in a
tinctive role of man within God’s creation has often position to disclose the secrets concealed within
been interpreted as a quasi-gnostic reading of the nature, thanks to an esoteric knowledge revealed
Biblical Genesis. Pico’s claim in the Oration that by means of symbols. According to Craven, who
‘God is not less philosopher than priest’ can be describes in detail the various interpretations
viewed as reflecting the humanist belief in a revela- expressed by modern scholars about the relation-

--- Page 377 ---
Pye} PICO DELLA MIRANDOLA
ship between rationalism and ~ gnosticism in described (see Lelli 1994, 170-172); this treatise
Pico’s thought, the humanist’s attitude to gnosti- can be seen as further proof of Pico’s intention
cism is not different from that of other contempo- of employing hermeneutic devices for the inter-
raries, who were not convicted of gnostic beliefs. pretation of Scripture which could be used only
Craven admits a peculiar interest of the young by an elite of wise men, capable of reading texts
Count for secret teachings, but this trend should in not generally accessible languages like Hebrew.
be comprised within Pico’s intellectual elitism According to the Provengal author Gersonides
(Craven 1981). (Levi ben Gershom, 1288-1344), the Song of Songs
In recent years, theologians have argued that is an allegoric history of the various stages
Pico was a faithful and orthodox Christian, basing of the ascent of the human intellect to the Active
their assessment mostly on the opening of the Ora- Intellect of the aristotelian medieval tradition; at
tion; thus, according to Raspanti (1991, 107), to the same time it is also a book hiding profound
attribute gnostic views to a thinker who, in his last mysteries, such as that of the “death by kiss”,
years, decided to take the habit of the Dominican which was borrowed by Pico and later became a
friars, is tantamount to misunderstanding the effec- favourite commonplace of Christian kabbalists.
tive meaning of Pico’s deeply religious attitude. For Pico’s resorting to a philosophic Hebrew commen-
instance, the concepts of bliss and grace as dealt tary full of mystical implications explains also
with in Pico’s Heptaplus should be understood his assertion that even a rationalist text such as
within the context of Pico’s wide patristic and clas- Maimonides’ Moreh ha-Nevukhim (Guide of the
sical culture: like Augustine and Bernard of Perplexed) has to be interpreted in an occult man-
Clairvaux, as well as Plato or Plotinus, Pico stresses ner (see Pico’s 63th kabbalistic Conclusion). Such
the idea of reverting to the source in order to meet an approach towards philosophy was common
the Father. Nature and grace, like philosophy and among Jewish Italian thinkers, who tended to fuse
religion, are but two stages of the only path leading rationalism and Kabbalah, and was represented
to God (o0.c., 88). In other terms, Pico’s adaptation at its best by the Commentary on the Pentateuch
of kabbalistic ideas was mostly intended to rescue by the Italian 14th-century Jewish kabbalist
the church from what he felt were the limitations of Menahem of Recanati. This work, as well as
scholastic dogmatism; platonic, as well as kabbal- the aforementioned commentary by Gersonides,
istic views more nearly coincide with Christian were translated into Latin by Flavius Mithridates
faith than syllogistic reasonings. (Wirszubski 1989, 158-160). Menahem of Reca-
No consistent solution to this issue is possible nati often employed significant Spanish and
without a closer inspection of the environment Provencal Kabbalistic treatises which had been
in which Pico developed his speculation. If on influenced by various forms of pagan gnosis still
one hand we have to admit the strong influence circulating in the Middle Ages (according to
of Ficinian neoplatonism, on the other hand we Scholem, Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism, who
should recognize, in the same Florentine milieu saw the Renaissance flourishing of Kabbalah as a
where Pico spent most of his life, the late 1 5th- major gnostic revival), or embodied an intellectual
century reappraisal of averroism, as appearing also tradition dating to Biblical and Rabbinic times and
from the revival of love poems shaped according to strongly dependent on gnostic motifs diffused in
the Dolce Stil Novo schemes of the 13th century. It the ancient Near East (according to Idel, Kabbalah:
will suffice to recall Pico’s poetic activity (which can New Perspectives). Through such channels, mostly
be explained only in the intellectual frame of this ignored by non-Jews until Pico had them translated
reappraisal), as well as his above-mentioned Com- into Latin, gnostic ideas penetrated the intellectual
mentary on Girolamo Benivieni’s Love Poem, the system of a thinker whose main concern in show-
aim of which, according to the author, was to ing a favourable attitude toward intellectual gnosis
found a new poetic theology. The ascent of the was probably more that of highlighting his wide
intellective soul to its source through love is a cen- knowledge to the eyes of contemporary scholars
tral motif in Italian Renaissance literature; and it than that of transgressing Christian orthodoxy.
could have been connected by Pico to kabbalistic After presenting in his Conclusions and in his
speculation mainly through the numerous mystical Apology a theoretical treatment of magic as a nat-
commentaries on the Song of Songs, widely dif- ural art (distinguishing, as we have seen, a good
fused in Italian Jewish milieus since the Middle from an evil magic), and after trying to convince his
Ages. Pico possessed a Latin version of Gersonides’ audience about the authority of Arabic and Jewish
Commentary on the Song of Songs, where the occult disciplines, in his last years Pico changed
rational and mystical ways of ascent to God are his mind about the meaning of — astrology. He

--- Page 378 ---
PICO DELLA MIRANDOLA OD4.
probably intended to respond to his opponent balah in the Renaissance”, in: B.D. Cooperman (ed.),
Pedro Garsia, one of the theologians who had been Jewish Thought in the Sixteenth Century, Cambridge,
Mass.: Cambridge University Press, 1983, 186-242appointed by the Pope to evaluate the orthodoxy of
¢ Fabrizio Lelli, “Pico tra filosofia e qabbala”, in:
the Conclusions. The Spanish bishop’s refutation
Paolo Viti (ed.), Pico, Poliziano e !Umanesimo di fine
had concentrated on Pico’s astrological, magical, Ouattrocento, Firenze: Olschki, 1994, 170-172; 193-
and kabbalistic conclusions. This might be the 223 @ idem, “Yohanan Alemanno, Giovanni Pico
reason why Pico, probably also under Savonarola’s della Mirandola e la cultura ebraica italiana del XV
influence, decided to denounce the positive value secolo”, in: Gian Carlo Garfagnini (ed.), Giovanni
of astrology in his Disputations against Divina- Pico della Mirandola, Firenze Olschki, 1997, 303-325
¢ Antonino Raspanti, Filosofia, teologia, religione:
tory Astrology, arguing on a rational basis against
L’unita della visione in Giovanni Pico della Mirandola,
all supporters of astral divination and ceremo- Edi Palermo: Oftes, 1991 # Chaim Wirszubski, Pico
nial magic (among whom was Marsilio Ficino, della Mirandola’s Encounter with Jewish Mysticism,
although Pico defended him to a certain extent on Jerusalem: The Israeli Academy, 1989 ¢ S.A. Farmer,
the assumption that his attitude towards astral Syncretism in the West (see above).
magic was only theoretical). Relying on a careful
distinction between a negative astral divination, FABRIZIO LELLI
viewed as based upon a determinist doctrine, and a
positive divinely inspired prophecy, like that of Pierre d’Ailly (Petrus de Alliaco),
Savonarola (recalling medieval arguments on the “1356 0r 135 | Cotipiemne,
role of occult disciplines in a study program), Pico t+ 1420 Avignon
here seems to open the way to a new understanding
of science. The latter might have led him subse- Chancellor of the University of Paris from 1389
quently to reject also the magic and kabbalistic dis- to 1395; Bishop of Le Puy from 1395 to 1396, of
ciplines which had been among the doctrines upon Noyon in 1396 to 1397, and of Cambrai from
which he had founded, a few years earlier, his all- 1397; and Cardinal from 1411 until his death. A
comprehensive system of thought. However, Pico’s prolific author in matters of theology, ecclesiology,
sudden death interrupted this momentous project, and natural philosophy (including > astrology),
leaving to contemporaries and followers, as well as d’Ailly was primarily known as one of the leading
to modern scholars, the difficult task of ascertain- churchmen during the years of the Great Schism
ing the importance of the Disputations in view of (1378-1414). A noted proponent of the conciliar
later scientific developments. solution to the crisis, he played a crucial role at the
Council of Constance (1414-1417) that brought
Johannis Pici Mirandulae Concordiaeque Comes
the Schism to an end. During his years at the Uni- Opera omnia, Bononiae, 1496; Basileae, 1572 (reprint.
Torino, 1978) # Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, Ora- versity of Paris, d’Ailly taught many of the leading
tio de hominis dignitate, Heptaplus, De ente et Uno e minds of his day, including Nicholas of Clamanges
scritti vari (Eugenio Garin, ed.), Firenze: Vallecchi, (1363-1437) and Jean Gerson (1363-1429).
1942 ¢ idem, Disputationes adversus astrologiam divi- Like his pupil Gerson, d’Ailly did compose sev-
natricem (Eugenio Garin, ed.), 2 vols., Firenze: Vallec- eral treatises on the spiritual life, including Le
chi, 1946-1952 ¢@ idem, On the Dignity of Man, On
jardin amoureux de l’ame dévote (1401, possibly
Being and the One, Heptaplus (1940), repr. Indiana-
polis/New York/Kansas City, 1965 # S.A. Farmer, by Gerson), a Life of Celestine V (1408), Speculum
Syncretism in the West: Pico’s 900 Theses (1486). The considerationis (after 1408), Compendium con-
Evolution of Traditional Religious and Philosophical templationis (after 1408), Devota meditatio super
Systems, Tempe: Medieval & Renaissance Texts & psalmum: Judica me Deus (1414), Oratio domi-
Studies, 1998 [1999]. nica anagogice exposita (1414), Devota meditatio
super Ave Maria (1414), and Devota meditatio seu
Lit.: Brian P. Copenhaver, “Vocculto in Pico: Il mem
chiuso e le fauci spalancate da Azazel: La magia caba- expositio super psalmum: In te speravi (1414). But
listica di Giovanni Pico”, in: Gian Carlo Garfagnini if Gerson embraced > mysticism in the years after
(ed.), Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, Firenze: Olschki, 1400, his master did not follow the pupil’s lead.
1997, 213-236 # William G. Craven, Giovanni Pico Although d’Ailly’s treatises express an admiration
della Mirandola: Symbol of His Age, Geneva: Librairie of and need for the contemplative life, the general
Droz, 1981 @ Avery Dulles, Princeps Concordiae: Pico
assessment is that they are fairly traditional and
della Mirandola and the Scholastic Tradition, Cam-
unoriginal compilations on the topic. He was more bridge, Mass.: Cambridge University Press, t941 ¢
Eugenio Garin, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola: Vita e a man of action than a mystic.
dottrina, Firenze: Vallecchi, 1937 ¢ Moshe Idel, “The In his final decade, as the crisis in the church
Magical and Neoplatonic Interpretations of the Kab- reached a head, d’Ailly also immersed himself in

--- Page 379 ---
DS) PIERRE D’AILLY
the study of astrology, producing several notable D’Ailly’s writings remained an important source
treatises on the topic. D’Ailly’s interest in the stars for cosmographers and astrologers through the
was not new, but his whole-hearted embrace of Renaissance. A number of his astrological treatises
astrology after 1410 was a reversal from youthful appear in two important incunabula (Louvain,
condemnations of the science, such as seen in his 1483, and Augsburg, 1490) as well as in numerous
Tractatus utilis super Boecii de consolatione philo- manuscript copies. Christopher Columbus owned
sophie, written between 1377 and 1381, and De and annotated a copy of the 1483 incunable, and
falsis prophetis Il, composed between 1378 and d’Ailly’s astrological predictions were crucial to
1388. D’Ailly’s serious forays into astrology began Columbus’s sense of apocalyptic mission. D’ Ailly’s
in 1410, when he composed three treatises that prognostications informed later astrological pro-
bear the strong influence of the Franciscan > nouncements, such as those by Jean de Bruges in
Roger Bacon (ca. 1214-ca. 1292): Imago mundi, the 1440s and Pierre Turrell in the 1530s. His work
Epilogus mappe mundi, and De legibus et sectis on conjunctions was cited with approval by noted
contra superstitiosos astronomos. The latter work astrologers like Regiomontanus. It may well be
includes a defense of astrology and its usefulness in that d’Ailly’s example opened the floodgates to the
predicting religious change (that is, the “laws and wave of astrological apocalyptic predictions that
sects” of the title) through the examination of con- issued from European presses from the late 15th
junctions of Saturn and Jupiter, particularly those through the 17th centuries.
falling every 240 (“great conjunctions”) and every
Petrus de Alliaco, Tractatus de imagine mundi et960 years (“greatest conjunctions”).
varia ejusdem auctoris et Joannis Gersonis opuscula,
Treatises composed on the eve of the Council of
Louvain: Johann de Westphalia, ca. 1483 idem, Con-
Constance reveal that d’Ailly’s interest in the stars cordantia astronomie cum theologia. Concordantia
was tied up with apocalyptic fears surrounding the astronomie cum hystorica narratione. Et elucidarium
Great Schism. Many believed, as d’Ailly himself duorum precedentium, Augsburg: Erhard Ratdolt,
had in the early years of the Schism, that the divi- 1490 # Noel Valois, “Un ouvrage inédit de Pierre
sion in the Church signaled the imminent advent d’Ailly, le De persecutionibus ecclesiae” ,Bibliotheque
de l’Ecole des Chartes 65 (1904), 557-74 (partial edi-of Antichrist. Astrology helped to reassure d’Ailly
tion omitting much of the astrological material).
that the Council of Constance might indeed end the
Schism and delay the apocalypse. Lit.: Bernard Guenée, Between Church and State: The
Applying astrology to the study of human Lives of Four French Prelates in the Late Middle Ages,
history in these treatises demonstrated to d’Ailly Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991 (French
that conjunctions and other notable astrological orig. 1987) # Louis Salembier, Petrus de Alliaco, Lille:
J. Lefort, 1886 # Laura Ackerman Smoller, History,
events had correlated with major political and
Prophecy, and the Stars: The Christian Astrology of
religious changes in the past and could reasonably Pierre d’Ailly, 1350-1420, Princeton: Princeton Uni-
be expected to do so in the future. Accordingly, in versity Press, 1994 @ idem, “The Alfonsine Tables and
his treatise Concordantia astronomie cum hystor- the End of the World: Astrology and Apocalyptic Cal-
ica narratione, completed May ro, 1414, d’Ailly culation in the Later Middle Ages”, in: Alberto Fer-
produced the culmination of his astrological reiro (ed.), The Devil, Heresy and Witchcraft in the
Middle Ages: Essays in Honor ofJeffrey Burton Rus-researches: his prediction that Antichrist would
sell, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1998, 211-239 @ Paul Tschack-
appear in or around the year 1789. He arrived at
ert, Peter von Ailli: Zur Geschichte des grossen
that date by examining three important signifiers of abendldndischen Schisma und der Reformconcilien
religious change, namely, a greatest conjunction of von Pisa und Constanz (1877), Amsterdam: repr.
Saturn and Jupiter, the completion of ten revolu- Rodopi, 1968 ¢ Pauline Moffit Watts, “Prophecy and
tions by the planet Saturn, and an alteration in the Discovery: On the Spiritual Origins of Christopher
position attained by the accessus and recessus of Columbus’s ‘Enterprise of the Indies’”, American His-
torical Review 90 (1985), 73-102.the eighth sphere (this latter phrase refers to one of
the explanations of the precession of the equinoxes
offered in the Alfonsine Tables). Although d’Ailly LAURA ACKERMAN SMOLLER
subsequently would revise many of his pronounce-
ments about astrology (for example, in the Eluci- Pietism
darium astronomice concordie cum theologica et
cum hystorica narratione, finished on September The term Pietism refers to a widely influential
24, 1414), he reaffirmed the prediction for 1789 in reform movement in the 17th and 18th centuries,
one of his final works, the De persecutionibus the first on the Continent since the Reformation.
ecclesie of 1418. Historical, geographical and personal factors have

--- Page 380 ---
PIETISM 956
all affected the definitions of Pietism, but since in the three estates against proposed reforms, and
the second half of the roth century a “broad” con- adducing hope for the Church’s improvement.
cept has become common currency. No longer Spener’s cardinal themes are rebirth, renewal and a
restricted to the Lutheran movement deriving from personal form of Christianity. His most famous
Philipp Jacob Spener (1635-1705) and August pupil Francke, though inferior to him in theologi-
Hermann Francke (1663-1727), together with cal profundity, surpassed him completely in vision-
related currents in the reformed churches of Ger- ary energy, practical passion and organizational
many and Switzerland, the concept now embraces ability, and was able to rely on diligent, selfless and
the Netherlands, radical and separatist Pietism, as loyal collaborators in his work at Halle (Saale).
well as Count Nikolaus Ludwig von Zinzendorf The influence of Halle Pietism on the Prussian state
(1700-1760) and the Herrnhuter Brethren and can scarcely be overestimated. Simultaneously with
even Puritanism. Thus extended, it is possible to this Halle Pietism deriving from Spener and
identify the distant roots of Pietism. Francke, there were similarly influential Pietist
Johann Arndt (1555-1621) introduced the theme movements within the reformed churches both in
of Pietism in his Vier Biicher vom wahren Chris- the Netherlands as well as elsewhere in Germany
tentum (1605/10), as the retreat from an outer, (Labadists; Theodor Undereyck at Bremen), just as
formal and rigid Christianity to one that is vital Pietism as a whole is a phenomenon that extends to
and interior. The intense debate over this book east and west far beyond the frontiers of Europe.
of edification, distributed more widely than any In Wurttemberg there developed a special kind
other comparable Protestant work, arose not of Pietism linked to the Church, but permeated
least because of its swiftly acknowledged reception with a strongly speculative element in its major
of unorthodox sources such as > Valentin Weigel, Swabian representatives such as Johann Albrecht
Angela de Foligno, > Paracelsus et al. This ascetic Bengel (1687-1752) or ~ Friedrich Christoph
book has remained, albeit with omissions, an Oetinger. Here in Swabia the dangers of separatism
enduring part of the Reformation heritage. Ecclesi- were ameliorated by strategies for special religious
astical Pietism was thus highly motivated to gatherings outside official services.
integrate Johann Arndt and not abandon this Count Zinzendorf and the Herrnhuters are dif-
influential book to the radical spiritualists. A new ficult to classify in the overall picture of Pietism.
pious movement emerging at the beginning of the The origin and biography of the count is complex,
17th century in Germany found expression in the but his theories and policy of transforming theol-
vacillating figure of > Johann Valentin Andreae, ogy into communal practice were influential. The
but Lutheran orthodoxy also made a vital contri- significance of the Herrnhut brethren in many
bution, by fostering piety at all levels of society, and fields such as theology, with many practical appli-
in intellectual and religious life (cf. Johann Saubert, cations in pastoral and missionary work, as well as
Johann Matthaus Meyfart, Johann Gerhard, Ros- economics, literature, and much else can scarcely
tock University). be overestimated.
The divisive tendencies inherent in this early The diverse basic assumptions of Pietism have
pious movement developing c. 1670 at Frankfurt been variously emphasised over time: the personal
am Main, were integrated by Ph. J. Spener, the experience of faith; a close-knit community of true
leader of Lutheran Pietism in Germany. Already in believers; a determined effort to grow in sanctity; a
his Frankfurt period (1666-1686), Spener acquired critical view of the Church (in both doctrine and
great authority thanks to his profound theological hierarchy); a distance from the mundane world as
training, and a patient and shrewd observation well as the state; an inclination towards self-aware-
of the possibilities of networking closely with ness; an intensive study of what they perceived as
noble families. In 1686 he succeeded to the highest the will of God; criticism of a literalist faith; a crit-
position in German Lutheranism as senior court ical stance towards church services “ex opere oper-
preacher at Dresden, and from 1691 as provost at ato”. There is no uniform Pietism, a fact evident
St Nicolai in Berlin, and as a consistorial councillor from the vehement internal controversies between
where he exercised great influence for more than J.A. Bengel and Count von Zinzendorf, between
a dozen years. Spener gave the Pietist movement Halle and the Herrnhuters, J. Winckler and J.W.
its manifesto with his Pia Desideria / Hertzliches Petersen or > Gottfried Arnold and > Johann
Verlangen (1675), even though it was not particu- Georg Gichtel.
larly original. First published as a Preface to a new Across this wide thematic range, Pietism pro-
edition of Arndt’s Postille, Pia Desideria was highly duced tendencies which admitted of limited eccle-
effective by weighing complaints about conditions siastical integration, if at all. One may speak of

--- Page 381 ---
Di PIETISM
“radical”, “separatist” and heterodox Pietism. Netherlands, Johann Fischer, general superin-
Communities formed only sporadically and only tendant of Sulzbach, and > Christian Knorr von
occasionally lasted for longer periods. The spec- Rosenroth, active here from 1667 to 1689, all
trum extends from the “Society of Mother Eve” exemplified many facets of Pietism (chiliasm, philo-
(Eva von Buttlar) through barely institutionalised semitism, spiritualism).
communities at small aristocratic courts, Philadel- Enthusiasm coupled with prophetic utterance
phian communities (e.g. Heinrich Horch, 1652- also played a considerable role in Pietism at the end
1729), and followers of Gichtel, to Polycarp of the 17th century and in the first third of the 18th
Miiller’s foundation of independent Moravian century. Extreme enthusiasm is represented by
church communities. All these represent the occa- Johann Daniel Miller (1716-85) with his united
sionally bizarre expressions of Pietism’s early church of the “Revelation of Christ” and his mes-
struggle towards a “gathering” of the fellow sianic protest against the Enlightenment. This kind
faithful. of thinking is particularly strong among musical
Radical Pietism is difficult to define on account theorists and practitioners such as Johann Ludwig
of its overlap with ecclesiastical Pietism. Gottfried Fricker (1729-1766), a Swabian Pietist close to
Arnold combined both in his own spiritual career, EC. Oetinger. Research opens up a large field here;
while Gerhard Tersteegen (1697-1769), another the prophetic inspirations of Johann Friedrich
Radical Pietist, was also a Quietist, influenced by Rock (1678-1749) have been examined in their
Pierre Poiret (1646-1719) and Madame Guyon historical development, literary expression and
(1648-1717). Other currents and movements ramifications. Enthusiastic movements, particu-
approximated Radical Pietism in a modified form: larly among women, have always aroused excite-
remnants of Schwenckfeldians and Baptist groups, ment in the history of Pietism. The question of
pansophic and kabbalistic circles, and mystical special revelations beside Holy Scripture has
spiritualists. The traditions and sources at work remained an unsolved problem.
here display affinities to Pietism in their habits and The influence of Radical Pietist writings, often
systems of thought, often on the margins of the appearing in large editions with scant censorship,
church and seeking to develop outside official led to indifference towards dogmatic rigidity, theo-
church orthodoxy. Arndt could be regarded as a logical teaching and ecclesiastical confessions.
mystical theologian but for his attempt to institu- They emphasised an interpretation of Scripture
tionalise mystical and spiritualist traditions, as is based on the presence of the spirit and a relaxation
also the case with Joachim Betke (1601-1663), of the literal meaning of the Gospel and even eter-
Christian Hoburg (1607-1675) and Friedrich nal damnation. Indifference towards the outer
Breckling (1629-1711). ecclesiastical structure often extended to a sepa-
Boehmean thought has had a strong and var- ratist rejection of the church as “Babel”. No con-
ied influence on Pietism. The followers of > fession was regarded as the possessor of the truth
Jacob Boehme in Silesia surpass him in their chil- required for salvation, but the members of an invis-
iasm or strong criticism of the church (Abraham ible spiritual church may be found hidden in all
von Franckenberg [1593-1652], Johann Theodor confessions. This inner break with orthodox doc-
Tschesch [1595-1649], Daniel Czepko [1605- trines leading to the development of special teach-
1666], Johann Scheffler [1624-1677]). Influences ings smoothed the path towards the theological
on the Netherlands and England were strong. Poli- Enlightenment. The best known product of Radi-
tical and ecclesiastical frontiers offered no obstacle cal Pietistism is G. Arnold’s Unpartheyischer
to spiritualists and practitioners of Hermetic arts. Kirchen- und Ketzer-Historie (1699/1700). One
In the latter sphere, one finds references to precur- should not underestimate the influence of songs,
sors in the 16th century and earlier (Sebastian correspondence, diaries, poetry, journals and
Franck, Caspar Schwenckfeld, Valentin Weigel). (auto-)biographical collections nor their linguistic
Catholic Quietism and early modern Catholic mys- respect. This is particularly true of such 18th-
ticism were also influential across confessional bor- century figures as Johann Henrich Reitz, >
ders. Christian August, Count Palatine of Sulzbach Emanuel Swedenborg, EC. Oetinger, ~ Johann
(1622-1708), initiated reforms involving the Jews Heinrich Jung-Stilling and - Johann Kaspar
far beyond traditional confessional borders. > Lavater, who represent highly individual examples,
Franciscus Mercurius van Helmont was able to intensely concerned with natural science, medicine
arouse the Count Palatine’s interest in > Christian and other branches of science.
theosophy, Kabbalah [> Jewish Influences] and Due to its manifold expressions, any considera-
~ alchemy. Three theologians summoned from the tion of Pietism as a uniform movement in the rgth

--- Page 382 ---
PIETISM 958
and 2oth centuries runs the risk of seeing continu- ful gold-making and anticipates the metaphoric use
ity rather than completely new impulses. Recur- of alchemical concepts as in ~ Johann Valentin
rent similar phenomena such as the inspirations Andreae.
of Maria Gottliebin Kummer (1756-1828), which One can scarcely overestimate the influence of >
accompanied disasters between 1791 and 1809, Jacob Boehme on Radical Pietism, which must be
probably derive from different sources. However regarded as a fruitful humus for Hermetic ideas.
new religious communities like the Seventh Day Boehme (and Arndt) accord rebirth a far greater
Adventists are akin to Pietists in awaiting the significance than the justification by faith in Luther.
moment of prophetic awakening. Elsewhere a > Johann Georg Gichtel is the most important fol-
publishing house called “Inneres Leben” seeks to lower of Boehme in describing the path of rational
broadcast such works of literature as the Berle- man who has turned away from God to the status
burger Bible and works of Gichtel and Gerhard of one reborn and bathed in a divine light, where
Tersteegen (1697-1769). Around the middle of the the three principles of divine essence and the whole
18th century Pietism loses its force as a vital form- cosmos reflect each other.
ative movement. Late Pietism and neo-Pietism tend + Gottfried Arnold plays a key role in two
to characterize revivals of classical Pietism rather respects with regard to the dissemination of Her-
than an unbroken and continuing influence of meticism within Pietism. In the first place, he
Pietism. describes in his Kirchen- und Ketzer-Historie a
Museum exhibitions today (Halle, Herrnhut, number of Hermetic authors (> Paracelsus, Khun-
Stuttgart, Ludwigsburg) thematize the events and rath, > J.B. van Helmont). In the second place,
figures of Pietism. The reciprocal influence of Arnold remained the source for all Pietists sympa-
Pietism and Hermeticism is slowly emerging now thetic to Hermeticism in the 18th century (Hom-
that scholarship is approaching Pietism within a burg circle and EC. Oetinger). Arnold described a
wider and philosophical approach. The question of biblically founded and divinely illuminated “Magia
Pietism’s relationship to natural science is also naturalis”, even assimilating Martin Luther’s refer-
important. The Bibliotheca Philosophica Herme- ence to the ‘free and natural art of physicians and
tica (Bibliotheek J.R. Ritman, Amsterdam) high- their like’, which had only been perverted by jug-
lights the many ramifications of the pre-history and glers and sorcerers. A medical and pharmaceutical
associated currents of Pietism and explores its “Chymistry” is favoured in ecclesiastical Pietism
points of contact with the Hermetic traditions. The while Radical Pietism inclined more to hermetic-
collections, research, publications and exhibitions mystical alchemy and Boehmean_ philosophy.
of that institution in Amsterdam have an influence Johann Konrad Dippel (1673-1734) exemplifies
extending well beyond that of Pietism. the path from rigid Lutheran orthodoxy to
The doctrine of rebirth in Pietism parallels the separatist radical Pietism with a strong theologi-
process of purification in its many stages from the cal, philosophical and medical stamp. His career
conquest of Evil up to union with the Godhead. > brought him into contact with Johann Georg
Alchemy understood as a Hermetic philosophy Rosenbach and often with J.S. Carl. All three failed
offered a fruitful soil for these ideas of rebirth but in their quest for gold and higher wisdom. Against
also risks of alienation and falsehood that were the background of Hermetic traditions, Dippel
not immediately obvious. Two figures of Pietism founded a comprehensive and philosophically crit-
and its influential pre-history illustrate this medical ical anthropology based on communication with
and scientific thought with special reference to God. In 1729 he regarded himself as a friend of
the reception and development of Hermeticism: Halle Pietism as well as a follower of the new
Johann Arndt and Johann Samuel Carl. Arndt’s rational chemistry and medicine taught by Georg
fourth book of True Christianity (1605-10), “Liber Ernst Stahl (1660-1734), professor at Halle. Carl
Naturae”, shows him to be a transmitter of was the chief representative of Radical Pietist
Paracelsian alchemy and mystical spiritualism in medicine but tried to overcome what he regarded
the pre-Pietist period. He represents a spiritual as its obscure Hermetic fascination. Following in
alchemy reaching back into the 16th century and the wake of Stahl and promoting his theories
fostered by theologically trained physicians and also in the circles of Pietists, Carl’s exceptional
medically literate theologians. The Bible and the knowledge of Hermetic literature still enabled him
Book of Nature are the dominant themes, as trans- to favour milder remedies against the more aggres-
mitted by the Leipzig-born > Heinrich Khunrath sive methods of medical and pharmaceutical prac-
into spiritualist and Pietist traditions. Khunrath tice. Carl took his leave of Hermeticism like
firmly differentiates Christian alchemy from deceit- ‘a Hermetic Saul converted into a Stahlian Paul’

--- Page 383 ---
95? PIETISM
(C. Habrich). Accordingly he regarded nature and & Ruprecht, 1974- # Moravian Music Foundation
its God-given order as complete and no longer Publications 1-, 1955- # Kataloge der Franckeschen
needful of transformation. This provided material Stiftungen zu Halle 1- Halle (Saale) 1995- ¢ Hallesche
Forschungen 1-, 1996- ¢ Hallesche Repertorien
for an intense controversy with Dippel, continued
und Ouellenpublikationen 1-, 1997-, both Tubingen:
by Dippel’s supporter, Johann Christian Sencken- Niemeyer/Halle: Franckesche Stiftungen.
berg (1707-1772). The hermetic-mystical position Collective Volumes: Erich Beyreuther, Studien zur The-
remained one based upon inspiration, while eccle- ologie Zinzendorfs, zweite, mit Nachbemerkungen
siastical and radical-separatist Pietists such as Carl und Registern versehene Auflage (Nikolaus Ludwig
and Tersteegen used alchemical concepts only as von Zinzendorf: Materialien und Dokumente 2/31),
metaphors. As far as Carl was concerned, the Hildesheim/Ziirich/New York: Georg Olms, 2000 ¢
Erich Beyreuther, Frémmigkeit und Theologie: Gesam-
increasingly autonomous spheres of laboratory
melte Aufsdtze zum Pietismus und zur Erweckungsbe-
work and medicine counted for nothing against wegung, Hildesheim/New York: Georg Olms, 1980
personal piety. A gulf lay between those Pietists ¢ Bruno Bianco, Fede e Sapere: La parabola dell’
who merely “played” with alchemical notions “Aufklarung” tra pietismo e idealismo (= Nobilita
and the illuminates who espoused a pious Her- dello spirito: Nuova Serie 31), Napoli: Morano, 1992
meticism such as the Homburgers, who had a high ¢ Dietrich Blaufufs, Korrespondierender Pietismus,
Ausgewahlte Beitrage (eds. Wolfgang Sommer undregard for > Georg von Welling’s Opus Mago-
Gerhard Philipp Wolf), Leipzig: Evangelische Verlags-
Cabbalisticum et Theologicum (1719, ... et Theo-
anstalt, 2003 ¢ Martin Brecht, Ausgewahlte Aufsatze.
sophicum [1735]). Bd. 2: Pietismus, Stuttgart: Calwer Verlag, 1997 ¢
Oetinger represents the zenith and conclusion of Rudolf Dellsperger, Kirchengemeinschaft und Gewis-
Pietism’s vital relationship with Hermeticism. He sensfreiheit: Studien ... (= Basler und Berner Studien
encompasses Hermeticism, alchemy, and a knowl- zur historischen und systematischen Theologie 71),
edge of antiquity with sovereign independence as Bern et al.: Lang 2001 # Carl Hinrichs, Preufentum
und Pietismus: Der Pietismus in Brandenburg-Preufsen
well as eclecticism. Finally, Carl Arnold Kortum
als religios-soziale Reformbewegung, Gottingen: Van-
(1745-1824), a member of the Tersteegen Circle, denhoeck & Ruprecht, 1971 # Martin H. Jung, Nach-
represents a phenomenon in the late Hermetic folger, Visiondrinnen, Kirchenkritiker .. . Studien zum
period of Pietism, with his call in 1796 for the foun- Pietismus, Leipzig: Evangelische Verlags-Anstalt, 2003
dation of a “Hermetic Society” [~ Hermeticism ¢ Hans Leube, Orthodoxie und Pietismus: Gesam-
and Hermetic Societies], which conducted alchem- melte Studien. Mit einem Geleitwort von M.[artin]
Schmidt und einer Bibliographie, ed. Dietrich Blaufuical research until 1819.
(= Arbeiten zur Geschichte des Pietismus 13), Bielefeld:
Martin Schmidt & Wilhelm Jannasch (eds.), Das Luther-Verlag, 1975 # Wolfgang Martens, Literatur
Zeitalter des Pietismus (Klassiker des Protestantismus und Frommigkeit in der Zeit der frithen Aufklarung
6 = Sammlung Dietrich 271), Bremen: Carl Schiine- (= Studien und Texte zur Sozialgeschichte der Literatur
mann, 1965 Texte zur Geschichte des Pietismus: 25), Tubingen: Niemeyer, 1989 Martin Schmidt,
Reihe 2-8, G6ttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht/ Wiedergeburt und neuer Mensch: Gesammelte Studien
Berlin: De Gruyter, 1972 @ Peter C. Erb (ed.), Pietists: zur Geschichte des Pietismus [Bd. I] (= Arbeiten zur
Selected Writings (Classics of Western Spirituality), Geschichte des Pietismus 2), Witten: Luther-Verlag,
1969 Martin Schmidt, Der Pietismus als theologi- New York, Ramsey, Toronto: Paulist Press, 1983 ¢
sche Erscheinung: Gesammelte Studien zur Geschichte Hans-Jiirgen Schrader [et al.] (eds.), Kleine Texte des
Pietismus. 1-, Leipzig: Evangelische Verlagsanstalt, des Pietismus, Bd. 2: ... ed. Kurt Aland (= Arbeiten
zur Geschichte des Pietismus 20), GOttingen: Vanden- 1998-.
hoeck & Ruprecht, 1984 « Wolfgang Sommer, Politik,
Lit.: Bibliographies and Review Articles: Buiblio- Theologie und Frommigkeit im Luthertum der friihen
graphie zur Geschichte des Pietismus I-, Berlin: de Neuzeit: Ausgewahlte Aufsdtze (= Forschungen zur
Gruyter, 1972- # Klaus Deppermann & Dietrich Kirchen- und Dogmengeschichte 74), Gottingen: Van-
Blaufuf$ (from 1992: Udo Strater & Christel Butter- denhoeck & Ruprecht, 1999 ¢ Johannes Wallmann,
weck, Veronica Albrecht-Birkner, Martin Soboth), Theologie und Frémmigkeit im Zeitalter des Barock:
“Pietismus-Bibliographie” [1971-1990, 1992-], Pietis- Gesammelte Aufsdtze, Tubingen: J.C.B. Mohr (Paul
mus und Neuzeit 1- (1974-) # Siegfried Lodewigs, Der Siebeck), 1995 William Reginald Ward, Faith and
Pietismus im Spiegel seiner theologischen Kritiker, Faction, London: Epworth Press, 1993 # Winfried
Gottingen: Diss. theol., 1972 ¢ Dietrich Blaufufs, Zeller, Theologie und Frommigkeit: Gesammelte Auf-
“Pietismusforschung [ab 1945]”, in: idem, Korre- sdtze, [1]-2, ed. Bernd Jaspert (= Marburger Theologi-
spondierender Pietismus, Leipzig: Evang. Verlags- sche Studien 8.15), Marburg: N.G. Elwert, 1971,
Anstalt, 2003, 359-386. 1978.
Book Series: Arbeiten zur Geschichte des Pietismus 1- Chapters and Articles: Leiv Aalen, “Die ‘esoterische’
16, Bielefeld: Luther-Verlag, 17-, Vandenhoeck & Ru- Theologie des Grafen von Zinzendorf”, in: Dietrich
precht: Gottingen, 1967- Pietismus und Neuzeit 1-3, Meyer (ed.), Pietismus - Herrnhutertum - Erweckungs-
Bielefeld: Luther-Verlag, 4- Gottingen: Vandenhoeck bewegung: Festgabe fiir Erich Beyreuther, Cologne:

--- Page 384 ---
PIETISM 960
Rheinland-Verlag, 1982, 207-263 ¢ Carl Andresen Deutscher Nation: Nord- und Ostmitteleuropa (Grun-
(ed.), Handbuch der Dogmen- und Theologiege- dri der Geschichte der Philosophie. Begriindet von
schichte, 3, Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Friedrich Ueberweg, Die Philosophie des 17. Jahr-
1984 (= 1998), 97-115: “Der Pietismus” (by Gottfried hunderts, vol. 4), Basle: Schwabe & Co., 2001, 7-142
Hornig) « Martin Brecht [et al.] (eds.), Geschichte « Ways of Hermes: A Survey of the Exhibitions in
des Pietismus, 1-3: Vom 17. bis... 20. Jahrhundert; Florence and Venice now in Amsterdam, Amsterdam:
4: Glaubenswelt und Lebenswelten, Gottingen: Van- Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica, 2002 ¢ Rudolf
denhoeck & Ruprecht, 1993, 1995, 2000, 2004 Schlégl, “Hermetismus als Sprache der ‘Unsichtbaren
¢ Reinhard Breymayer, “Pietismus”, Historisches Kirche’: Luther, Paracelsus und die Neutralisten in der
Worterbuch der Rhetorik VI, Tubingen: Niemeyer, Kirchen- und Ketzerhistorie Gottfried Arnolds”, in:
2003, 1191-1214 # Hans-Georg Kemper, Deutsche Trepp, Antike Weisheit und kulturelle Praxis, 165-188.
Lyrik der friihen Neuzeit; 3: Barock-Mystik; Bd. 5/1:
Aufklarung und Pietismus, Tibingen: Niemeyer, 1988, DIETRICH BLAUFUS
1991 «# “Pietismus”, Religion in Geschichte und
Gegenwart V1, Tiibingen: J.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck),
2003, 1341-1354 @ Hans Schneider, “Das ‘Platonisch- Plethon, Georgios Gemistos,
Hermetische Christenthum’: Ehregott Daniel Colbergs * ca. 1355-1360 Constantinople,
Bild des frithneuzeitlichen Spiritismus”, in: Nicola tT 26.6.1452 (2?) Mistra
Kaminski et al., Hermetik... (= Untersuchungen
zur deutschen Literaturgeschichte 113), Tubingen:
George Gemistos, best known under his nick-
Niemeyer, 2002, 21-42 ¢ Hans-Jiirgen Schrader,
name “Plethon”, was one of the most notable “Pietismus”, Literatur Lexikon: Begriffe, Realien,
Methoden XIV, Berlin/Munich: Bertelsmann Lexikon philosophers of the end of the Byzantine era.
Verlag, 1993, 208-216 # FE. Ernest Stoeffler, The Rise of After following the traditional course of studies
Evangelical Pietism (= Studies in the History of Reli- at Constantinople, he made a long stay at the
gions 9), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1965, *1972 F. Ernest Ottoman court in Adrianople, staying with a Jew
Stoeffler, German Pietism during the XVIII century (= named Elisha who was well-versed in the Arab
Studies in the History of Religions 24), Leiden: E.J.
and Persian commentators on Aristotle (Averroes,
Brill, 1973 # FE Ernest Stoeffler (ed.), Continental
Pietism and Early American Christianity, Grand ~+ Avicenna, and the school of Sohrawardi). From
Rapids: Eerdmans, 1976 ¢ Burkhard Weber, Elisha, he presumably learned some doctrines
“Pietisme”, Dictionnaire de Spiritualité XI, Paris: concerning > Zoroaster. On returning to Con-
Beauchesne, 1986, 1743-1758 [see also Dictionnaire stantinople, Gemistos was victimized by a cabal
de Spiritualité, Tables Générales, idem, 557]. of churchmen on account of the teachings he
Pietism and Hermetism: Burkhard Dohm, “‘Gotter der
was giving out. Emperor Manuel II Paleologos
Erden’: Alchimistische Erlosungsvisionen in radikal-
sent him to Mistra as political advisor to his pietistischer Poesie”, in: Anne-Charlott Trepp (ed.),
Antike Weisheit und kulturelle Praxis: Hermetismus in son Theodore II, the new despot of Morea. In
der Friihen Neuzeit (= Veroffentlichungen des Max- 1438-1439, Gemistos took part in the Council
Planck-Insituts fiir Geschichte, 171), G6ttingen: Van- of Ferrara and Florence on the union of the
denhoeck & Ruprecht, 2001, 189-204 # Hermann churches. He held an anti-unionist position,
Geyer, Verborgene Weisheit: Johann Arndts “Vier together with his former pupil Mark of Ephesus
Biicher vom Wahren Christentum” als Programm
(Markos Eugenikos), in order to defend the
einer spiritualistisch-hermetischen Theologie, 1-3
(= Arbeiten zur Kirchengeschichte 80/1.2, 3), Berlin: Orthodox cause and, above all, to preserve
de Gruyter, 2001 [reviewed by D. Blaufuf$ in Zeit- whatever traces of Hellenism remained in Greek
schrift fiir bayerische Kirchengeschichte 71, 2002] ¢ theology. Outside the Council, Plethon attended
Carlos Gilly, “Das Bekenntnis zur Gnosis von Paracel- philosophical meetings in which he was persuaded
sus bis auf die Schiiler Jacob BOhmes”, in: Roelof van to give teachings on Plato. In Florence, he wrote
den Broek & Cis van Heertum (eds.), From Poiman-
for his Italian friends a small Greek work (Where-
dres to Jacob Bohme: Gnosis, Hermetism and the
in Aristotle Disagrees with Plato, known under Christian Tradition (= Pimander 4), Amsterdam:
In de Pelikaan, 2000, 385-425 ¢@ Christa Habrich, the inappropriate title De Differentiis), in which
“Alchemie und Chemie in der pietistischen Tradition”, he tried to show that Aristotle went wrong every
in: Hans-Georg Kemper & Hans Schneider (eds.), time he distinguished himself from his master
Goethe und der Pietismus (= Hallesche Forschungen, Plato. This work unleashed a fierce argument
6), Tubingen: Niemeyer/Halle: Franckesche Stiftungen, between Platonists and Aristotelians, much fueled
2001, 45-77 # Wouter J. Hanegraaff, New Age Reli-
by the Byzantine emigrants in Italy. > Marsilio
gion and Western Culture: Esotericism in the Mirror of
Ficino later stated that Cosimo de’ Medici often Secular Thought (= Studies in the History or Religions
72), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1996, 365-410 ¢ Vilem listened to Plethon, who was like ‘a second Plato’,
Mudroch et al., Spiritualismus und Mystik, in: Helmut and that this gave Cosimo the idea of restoring the
Holzhey et al. (eds), Das Heilige Rémische Reich Academy in Florence. On his return to Mistra,

--- Page 385 ---
961 PLETHON
Plethon continued writing a work on the ideal tices, e.g. cutting out the oracles on the Sacrifice
constitution, the Book of Laws, which was only to of the Mnizouris Stone, on the Spinning Top of
be made known to the so-called phratores, mem- Hecate, and the saying ‘Never change barbarous
bers of the phratria which he assembled around names’. As for the Iynges or “charms” of the
him (the term, adopted from antiquity, originally Oracles, he assimilated them to the intelligible
referred to a political and religious subdivision of Forms and the Ideas (gods) of the Neoplatonists:
the polis; Plethon’s phratria was supposedly a divinities that were both thought of and thinking.
secret philosophical and religious association with Finally, Plethon reorganized Psellos’s collection
branches in Italy). In the Book of Laws, kept hid- and interpreted it in the context of a strictly posi-
den because of the threats hanging over him, tive and rational metaphysics, thereby separating
Plethon based the ideal political constitution on himself sharply from the Neoplatonic current. On
‘theology according to Plato and Zoroaster’: a the one hand, he states in the Book of Laws that
strictly hierarchical polytheism in which the the gods truly allow themselves to be known by
names of the gods were taken from the Hellenic humans. Even though the first god of all is known
tradition, but could be transposed into other by the ‘flower of the intellect’ (noou anthei: ora-
traditions. cle 28b) or ‘that in our intellection which is
The center of gravity of Plethon’s philosophical highest and most simple’ (as Plethon explains
system is the Magic Oracles of the Magi, Disciples it in his Commentary on the Magic Oracles), this
of Zoroaster. At the time of the Council of approach remains rational: Plethon excludes any
Florence, Plethon refused the forced unity that the recourse to negative theology or to faith. On the
Latin Church demanded in exchange for materi- other hand, and correlatively, theurgical practices
ally assisting the Byzantines to repel the Ottomans. are not considered a relevant method of access to
Rather than submitting the Orthodox Church to a the divine; the only rites prescribed seem to be
Pope who was himself contested by the Council of prayers and hymns to the gods, and these have an
Basel, and considering the impossibility of recon- effect only on those who recite them.
ciling the different monotheisms, the philosopher The link between the Oracles, Zoroaster, and
recommended a far more fundamental unity that the Magi may go back to the time when Plethon
would bring into one accord the Muslims, the was being taught by Elisha, the expert in the Per-
Jews, and the already divided Christians. It would sian commentators on Aristotle. In the Oracles,
entail abandoning the recent, monotheistic reli- as in Sohrawardi’s school, one finds the same
gions, and going back to the original doctrine that theme of light and a similar emphasis on the sage
must have been common to all the nations of the Zoroaster, of whom the ancient Greek as well as
inhabited world and taught by their wise legisla- the Persian sages are said to be the spiritual heirs.
tors, from the Iberians in the far West to the Zoroaster is thus made to replace > Moses,
Indians in the far East. This doctrine, itself derived the common reference-point of the monotheist
from the Ideas (considered as gods), had been best religions. Plethon also passes over in silence the
preserved and transmitted by the sage and law- sage Hermes [~ Hermes Trismegistus], whereas
giver Zoroaster and his disciples, the Magi, from Sohrawardi’s school and the Neoplatonists (espe-
whom it had been passed to Pythagoras, Plato, cially Iamblichus) consider him a_ primordial
and the (Neo)platonists [> Neoplatonism]; this sage. This is probably because in Greek patristics,
was the doctrine of the Magic Oracles. Hermes is coupled with Moses: Cyril of Alex-
Plethon had discovered these oracles in the andria, for example, credits Hermes Trismegistus,
collection made by Michael Psellos in the 11th the Egyptian priest and legislator, with the merit
century. He renamed them, expurgated them, of adopting part of Moses’ teachings and of an-
and eliminated all Christian interpretation from ticipating certain Christian revelations, while
them. Psellos’s collection is known by the title Eusebius of Caesarea reports the Jewish historian
Chaldaean Oracles (the Neoplatonists considered Artapanus as proving that Hermes and Moses
them as their sacred book, although the work were one and the same. Nonetheless, Plethon was
was actually contemporary with Porphyry). But well aware of certain similarities between >
while the term “Chaldaean” suggested popular > Hermetism and the Oracles, and admits in the
magic, even theurgy, Plethon explained that his Reply to Scholarios that in Egypt the priests
terminology referred, rather, to the doctrine of adopted the doctrines of Zoroaster and derived
the Magi, who were not magicians but sages. their fame therefrom.
Moreover, he purged Psellos’s collection from Marsilio Ficino, from his Commentary on the
every trace of Chaldaeism and theurgical prac- Philebus onwards, places Zoroaster at the head of

--- Page 386 ---
PLETHON 962
his list of ancient theologians, whereas before differentiis, modern edition in: Bernadette Lagarde,
1469 he considered Hermes as the most ancient “Le De differentiis de Pléthon d’aprés |’autographe
de la Marcienne”, Byzantion 43 (1973), 312-3433
sage. Ficino owned a manuscript containing sev-
modern edition with French translation in: Bernadette
eral of Plethon’s works (preserved in Florence as
Lagarde, Des différences entre Platon et Aristote,
Riccardianus graecus 76), notably the Magic Thése de troisiéme cycle, Etudes grecques, Université
Oracles of the Magi, Disciples of Zoroaster with de Paris IV-Sorbonne, Paris 1976; English transla-
Plethon’s Commentary (the text, detached, now tion in: Christopher Montague Woodhouse, George
being lost). In the margin of f.27v. of the Reply to Gemistos Plethon, The last of the Hellenes, Oxford:
Scholarios, Ficino notes, summing up a sentence Clarendon Press, 1986, 191-214 ¢@ Reply to Schol-
arios, modern edition in: Georgii Gemisti Plethonis
of Plethon’s, that ‘the Platonic theology has as its
Contra Scholarii pro Aristotele obiectiones (ed. Enrico
origin the tradition of Zoroaster’. Ficino inserted
V. Maltese), Leipzig: Teubner, 1988; modern edition
in his Platonic Theology many oracles taken from with French translation in: Bernadette Lagarde,
Plethon’s collection, and also included in his own “Georges Gémiste Pléthon: Contre les objections de
work, without mentioning the fact, whole sections Scholarios en faveur d’Aristote (Réplique)”, Byzan-
of Plethon’s Commentary on the Magic Oracles tion 59 (1989), 354-507 ¢ De differentiis & Reply to
(notably those on the pneuma as vehicle of the Scholarios, modern edition with French translation in:
Georges Gémiste Pléthon, De differentiis, Réplique a
soul, and on the idol as image of the rational
Scholarios (critical edition with French translation by
soul), while attributing this text to the Magi them- Bernadette Lagarde, introduction by Brigitte
selves. But Ficino, who also knew and used the Tambrun, notes by B. Tambrun and B. Lagarde) (Les
collection of the Chaldaean Oracles and Psellos’s Classiques de |’Humanisme), Paris: Les Belles Lettres
Commentary, associated these Magi with the (forthcoming) ¢ Book of laws, in: Pléthon, Traité des
Chaldaeans, and even with the magicians! > lois (ed. C. Alexandre, transl. A. Pellissier), Paris,
1858; repr. Amsterdam: A.M. Hakkert, 1966;Giovanni Pico della Mirandola also owned a copy
Pléthon, Traité des lois: Une cité idéale au XV° siécle.
of the Magic Oracles, the loss of which was
Lutopie néo-paienne d’un byzantin (presented by
deplored by > Francesco Patrizi. Patrizi himself Rémi Brague), Paris: J. Vrin, 1982 (partial reissue of
compiled an anthology (now Biblioteca Vaticana, the 1858 ed.); Pléthon, Traité des lois (critical edition,
Barberinianus graecus 179) comprising a copy of French translation, and notes by Brigitte Tambrun-
the first edition of the Magic Oracles of the Magi, Krasker) (Corpus Philosophorum Medii Aevi, Philo-
Disciples of Zoroaster (printed by Tiletanus in sophi Byzantini), Athens: The Academy of Athens /
1538), Latin translations of the collection and of Paris: J. Vrin / Brussels: Ousia (in progress).
the longer version of Plethon’s Commentary, the
Lit.: Michael John Bridgman Allen, Synoptic Art:
shorter version in both Greek and Latin, and other Marsilio Ficino on the History of Platonic Interpreta-
oracles mostly excerpted from the works of tion, Florence: Leo S. Olschki, 1998 ¢ Henri Corbin,
Proclus and Olympiodorus. En Islam iranien: Aspects spirituels et philosophiques
If Plethon could assert that Zoroaster’s doctrine Il, Sohraward? et les platoniciens de Perse, Paris:
had been transmitted to Pythagoras and Plato, Gallimard, 1971, repr. 1991, 19-39 # Karl H. Dan-
nenfeldt, “The Pseudo-Zoroastrian Oracles in the
and could make Plato compatible with the Magic
Renaissance”, Studies in the Renaissance 4 (1957),
Oracles, it was because he believed that Plato’s 7-31 ¢ Ilana Klutstein, Marsilio Ficino et la théologie
teaching was not limited to what he had consigned ancienne, Oracles chaldaiques, Hymnes orphiques-
to writing. In the Reply to Scholarios, Plethon fol- Hymnes de Proclus, Florence: Leo S. Olschki, 1988 ¢
lows Aristotle, Alexander of Aphrodisias, and the Frangois Masai, Pléthon et le platonisme de Mistra,
Neoplatonists in the idea of a teaching given by Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1956 #¢ Michael Stausberg,
Plato by word of mouth. With Plethon, from the Faszination Zarathushtra, |, Berlin, New York: Walter
de Gruyter, 1998, 35-92 ¢ Brigitte Tambrun, “Ficin,
start, it is thus an open Platonism that is transmit-
Gémiste Pléthon et la doctrine de Zoroastre”, Actes
ted to the West, ready to receive into its crucible du Colloque International ‘Marsilio Ficino tra storia e
various esoteric doctrines rejected by Christianity. testi’ (Florence, 1-3 Oct. 1999), Rome (forthcoming)
¢ eadem, “Ficin, Pléthon et les mages disciples de
Magika logia ton apo Zoroastrou magén, Georgiou Zoroastre”, in: Pierre Magnard (ed.), Marsile Ficin:
Gemistou Pléthénos Exégésis eis ta auta logia. Les platonismes a la Renaissance (Collection Philo-
Oracles chaldaiques. Recension de Georges Gémiste logie et Mercure), Paris: J. Vrin, 2001, 169-180 ¢
Pléthon (critical edition with introduction, French eadem, “Marsile Ficin et le Commentaire de Pléthon
translation, and commentary by Brigitte Tambrun- sur les Oracles chaldaiques”, Accademia: Revue de
Krasker) & La recension arabe des Magika logia la Société Marsile Ficin 1 (1999), 9-48 # eadem,
(ed. Michel Tardieu) (Corpus Philosophorum Medii Pléthon: Le retour de Platon (Collection Philologie et
Aevi, Philosophi Byzantini 7), Athens: The Academy Mercure), Paris: J. Vrin, forthcoming 200 ¢ Michel
of Athens / Paris: J. Vrin / Brussels: Ousia, 1995 ¢ De Tardieu, “Pléthon lecteur des Oracles”, Méiis 2

--- Page 387 ---
963 POIRET
(1987), 141-164 ¢@ Christopher Montague Wood- Theologic Christiane juxta principia Jacobi Boeh-
house, George Gemistos Plethon: The Last of the mui teutonici, Idea Brevis et Methodica, published
Hellenes, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986.
in 1708. Here, as is obvious from the title, Poiret
outlines the theology of Boehme ‘briefly and
BRIGITTE TAMBRUN
methodically’. He also published a Biblioteca mys-
ticorum selecta (Amsterdam 1708), which contains
Poiret, Pierre, * 1646 Metz, his selection of the works of mystical authors, as
t 21.5.1719 Rheynsburg well as a book of commentaries on emblems enti-
tled L’dme amante de son Dieu, représentée dans
Known as a “Quietist” mystic, Poiret drew upon les emblemes d’Hermannus Hugo (Cologne 1717),
the theosophy of + Boehme more explicitly than sometimes wrongly attributed to Madame Guyon.
either of the other major figures of this movement, From all of these publications, we can recognize
Guyon and > Bourignon, whose works he was in Poiret a figure belonging to the theosophic tradi-
instrumental in publishing. Poiret was a Calvinist tion, a man of immense productivity responsible
pastor who preached in Heidelberg until he for a number of major publications, and of often
was converted to the > mysticism of Tauler by unacknowledged influence on subsequent Euro-
Bourignon, and was persecuted by local church pean literature and religion. Poiret is an enigmatic
officials. By 1676, he was forced to live in Amster- figure in some respects — for instance, early on he
dam, where he met > Johann Gichtel, the “hermit was influenced by the work of René Descartes,
of Amsterdam” and founder of the Engelsbriider, who would remain influential even during his
or angelic brethren. Poiret became an influential later, more Boehmean period. This is remarkable
figure throughout Western Europe not only because Cartesian and Boehmean thought are usu-
because he edited and published the works of ally considered irreconcilable. Poiret remains a
Guyon and Bourignon, but also because of his figure whose work deserves a comprehensive reap-
own writings, which were widely distributed and praisal that fully takes into account his place in the
read in theosophic circles. His work eventually theosophic tradition as a whole, as well as the rela-
became influential in the emergence of German tionship between Quietism, Germanic mysticism,
~ Romanticism, and he drew explicitly and ex- and theosophy during this period. Major studies
tensively on Germanic mysticism — in particular are Chevallier (1994), Krieg (1975, 1979), and
Tauler, Boehme, and the Theologia Germanica. Wieser (1932).
Poiret was in touch with the Philadelphians in Eng-
land, and was instrumental in making possible the Poiret, Pierre, Bibliotheca Mysticorum selecta, Amster-
English publications of Bourignon’s works. He dam: Ex officina Wetsteniana, 1708 # L’Economie
died in Rheynsburg in the Netherlands, where he divine, ou Systéme universel et démontré des oeuvres
had taken nearly life-long refuge from ecclesiastical et des desseins de Dieu envers les hommes, 7 vols.,
Amsterdam: H. Wetstein, 1687 « L’Ame amante de
persecution.
son Dieu, représentée dans les emblémes d’Hermannus
Poiret’s magnum opus is his seven-volume Hugo, Cologne, 1717 ¢ La Paix des bonnes ames,
L’Economie divine (Amsterdam 1687), published Amsterdam: Theodore Boeteman, 1687 ¢ Theologiae
in English translation in London in 1713. In this Christianae juxta principia Jacobi Boehmii, teuto-
Divine Economy, Poiret offered a grand view of nici, Idea Brevis et Methodica, Amsterdam, 1687 ¢
human history, covering the nature of creation, The Divine Economy, 6 vols., London: R. Bonwick,
the fall, and most importantly, ‘VEconomie du 1713.
Rétablissement de homme aprés I’Incarnation
Lit.: Robert Amadou, Un grand mystique protestantde Jésus-Christ’ (The Economy of Re-establishing
francais: Pierre Poiret, Paris: Denoél, 1950 ¢ Marjo-
Humanity After the Incarnation of Jesus Christ)
laine Chevallier, Pierre Poiret 1646-1719: Du protes-:
and ‘V’Economie de la coopération de l’homme tantisme a la mystique, Geneve: Labor et Fides, 1994
avec l’opération de Dieu’ (The Economy of Human La paix des bonnes ames (critical ed. Marjolaine
Cooperation with the Operation of God). In these Chevallier), Geneve: Droz, 1998 Brian Gibbons,
sections of Divine Economy, we find what might be Gender in Mystical and Occult Thought: Behmenism
called the limited millennialism of Poiret, a grand and Its Development in England, Cambridge: Cam-
bridge UP, 1976, 15-16, 180-183 # Serge Hutin, Les
schema in which humanity moves toward reunion
Disciples anglais de Jacob Boehme aux XVII et XVI-
with God. II° siécles, Paris: Editions Denoél, 1960, 26ff. ¢ R.A.
In this major work by Poiret one can perceive the Knox, Enthusiasm: A Chapter in the History of Reli-
influence of Boehme, but Poiret’s more explicit gion, Oxford: Oxford UP, 1950, 243, 352, 355 # Gus-
Boehmean writing is to be found in another work, tav Krieg, Die Theologie Pierre Poirets, Ihr Werden

--- Page 388 ---
POIRET 964
und Wesen, Bonn, Universitat Bonn, 1975 ¢ idem, Der tion went together with the appearance of democ-
Mystische Kreis: Wesen und Werden der Theologie racy, just as the interpretation of the signs given by
Pierre Poirets, Gottingen: Vandenhoeck, 1979 ¢ Nils the Pythoness at Delphi for the founding of new
Thune, The Behmenists and the Philadelphians: A
colonies linked the political strategy of the Greek
Contribution to the Study of English Mysticism in the
cities to a type of speculation with esoteric traits. It 17th and 18th Centuries, Uppsala: Almquist and Wik-
sells, 1948, 176ff. ¢ Max Wieser, Peter Poiret: Der is not surprising that in the messianic intellectual
Vater der romantischen Mystik in Deutschland. Zum ambience of the Mediterranean during the Hel-
Ursprung der Romantik in Deutschland, Minchen: lenistic era, Philo of Alexandria classified the polit-
Miiller, 1932. ical arts as belonging to ~ magic and likened
statesmen to magicians and sorcerers (Treatise on
ARTHUR VERSLUIS dreams, 2-39). With the exception of those who
incarnated the new divine model on earth, and
Politics and Esotericism whose figures are found in the Scriptures (Solo-
mon, and more especially Melchisedech, the mys-
The difficulties inherent in the potentially unlim- terious King of Salem, without father, mother or
ited field of politics, combined with the complexity offspring, the guarantee for the legitimacy of Israel
of the definition of ~ esotericism, requires a to whom Abraham paid his tithe in Gen. 14:20),
definition of the method of approach used here. It the attitudes of the Jewish exegetes and the Christ-
includes both a reflection on institutions from the ian Fathers remained very similar on this point.
point of view of political philosophy, which opens Moses Maimonides, commenting in the Middle
up the question of the legal status of esoteric Ages on the Torah in his Guide to the Perplexed (2,
groups, and an anthropology of politics including 39), contrasted the political regimes resulting, for
its fields of representation and their variations in example, from the “laws of the Greeks” with those
space and time. Another serious difficulty lies in the founded on the words of the prophets. However, a
unconscious or deliberate confusion of the esoteric certain doubt concerning the authenticity of advice
and the religious, which is in fact a prolongation, in that arrived through the “voice of heaven” left
this particular aspect, of the interference and room even in the Scriptures for divination [>
conflicts between politics and religion. Divinatory Arts] and for magicians, as testified by
In historical terms, the elements of these types about twenty biblical references. The renewal of
of relationship were already in place in classical the prohibition, which proves the continuation of
Greek antiquity and in the world of the biblical the practice, and the consultation of the Witch
prophets. Thereafter, the changes in Western reli- of Endor by King Saul (I Sam. 28:7) are examples:
gious consciousness at the time of the Renaissance ‘Seek out for me a woman who is a medium...’.
and the emergence of politics in the modern sense The confirmation by “occult arts” (Maimonides’s
favored speculations of an esoteric kind on the expression) of heaven’s decree abandoning Saul
legitimacy of power. At the time of the Enlighten- endowed them with a certain legitimacy: it was
ment, and then the French Revolution, the eclipse indeed the shade of Samuel that appeared.
of the clergy’s share in political power, and even in The Middle Ages inherited from Antiquity, with
some countries its elimination, gave rise to new the separation of powers, an uncertainty about the
needs for unity and a search for meaning, which boundary between their respective domains: to
esotericism was ambitious to satisfy. Tied to the the sovereign as image of the divine model cor-
establishment of democracy in the roth and 2oth responded the authority of the State as the
centuries, the relation of esotericism and politics foundation of pontifical canon law. The pontifical
has evolved in the contemporary world alongside religious legislation set down in the Decrees of
globalization. This evolution has gone hand in Gratian (1140) rested more on Roman law than on
hand with that of the religious and scientific the Bible. Esoteric speculation as a procedure of
imagination. knowledge capable of effecting a bridge between
The transition to citizenship (politeia) in Athens these two domains thus gradually came to hold an
occurred in symbiosis with the original familial and important stake. It was already present in the dis-
tribal society; Aristotle in his Nicomachean Ethics courses of visionary prophetesses such as -> Hilde-
presented man as “naturally” political, and Plato gard of Bingen, who drew her teachings from her
entrusted the philosopher with a mission of re- access to the “primordial language” free from any
descending into the cave to transmit the divine ~ mysticism, and was heeded by princes and popes
models that are inaccessible to ordinary men. Thus during the conflict that opposed them to the
the practices of the mystery religions and of initia- Empire, notably to Frederick Barbarossa (1122-

--- Page 389 ---
965 POLITICS AND ESOTERICISM
1190). The emergence in late medieval Europe of tian of Anhalt (1568-1630) seemed to him cap-
states founded on juridical bases favored the spec- able of playing this role, but this identification
ulations of such prophetesses, who counseled changed in the Rosicrucian texts as circumstances
sovereigns. With the Cistercian monk Joachim of altered. In Elizabethan England, one of Andreae’s
Fiore, commentary on the text of the Apocalypse inspirers, » John Dee, author of the Monas Hiero-
tended to integrate elements of an esoteric type, glyphica (1563) dedicated to the “liberal” Catholic
arithmological speculations, and exegesis of the Emperor Maximilian Il of Habsburg, placed his
signs for recognizing the Great Monarch and the talent as an astrologer at the service of his sover-
Angelic Pope that would mark the coming of eign; -> Michael Maier served Rudolf II (1552-
the fourth age. This validation of time by means of 1612) at Prague, etc.
a secret history was among the things that prepared In the 18th century, the Rosicrucian influence
the Renaissance, and the innumerable commenta- soon became part of the movement of > Freema-
tors on Joachim followed in the same direction. sonry, by being integrated into the various systems
At the time of the Renaissance, the emancipation of high degrees; it was always very visible in
of religious morality was accentuated (Machia- Europe, particularly in the entourage of Frederick
velli’s Prince being significant in this regard), and the Great of Prussia (1712-1786), with the role of
politics was henceforth considered an art, opening Bischoffswerder (1741-1803) and of the Gold- und
up to esoteric thought the heritage of a global Rosenkreuz (Golden Rose-Cross). The king had
vision of the world and of a link with the absolute. presented a unitary vision of the world in his Anti-
+ Tommaso Campanella, in The City of the Sun Machiavelli of 1739: ‘If one wishes to reason justly
(1599), associated the question of the union of in the world . .. one must go back to the origin of
churches and the realization of “natural law” things so as to know, as far as one can, the first prin-
under the scepter of the King of France with calcu- ciples’. This declaration is significant of the role
jations concerning a collision between the sun and that the masonic institutions may have played in
the earth. Even in the age of classicism, the argu- the great transformations of Europe during the
ment of John Milton’s Paradise Lost (1667) linked Enlightenment, as the chosen field of debate
the fall and original sin to a change in the axis of between conquering reason and various forms of
the earth. Moreover, the wars of religion gave a theosophical > Illuminism.
new vigor to esoteric-political speculation. In The After the dramas of the revolutionary wars, eso-
Ash Wednesday Supper (1584) ~ Giordano Bruno teric modes of thought contributed heavily to set-
identified Elizabeth I of England with the Virgin of ting up the new intellectual systems that presided
the Golden Age to whom the universal empire was over the difficult birth of democracy and a dawning
promised: certainly a mystic power, but one whose “sense of history”, expressed in equally new for-
exercise and approach were based on an intellec- mats. The term ésotérisme, of learned origin,
tual process. In the same way, the lilies of the royal appeared first in French (1828) and soon after in
arms of France, according to > Guillaume Postel, the main European languages; a little later came
went back to biblical symbolism and made Francis occultisme |> occult / occultism] — two terms illus-
I into a figure of the universal monarchy. The art trating the wish to create a legitimate intellectual
of politics, faced with the question of meaning, framework in confrontation with science on the
likewise found a new kind of expression, notably one side, and the struggling churches on the other.
after 1516 with the Utopia of Thomas More. But it Politically speaking, esoteric thought has been used
was the Rosicrucian manifestos [> Rosicrucian- in the romantic sense of a return to the past, to the
ism] that were most significant in associating the origins, against modernity, as well as being pro-
themes of secret transmission and of the orient as gressivist in the sense of awaiting the fulfillment of
a source of knowledge with magical and alchemi- prophecies. While + Joseph de Maistre speculated.
cal practices, in the story of the initiatic journey on the eschatological meaning of the trials of his
of Christian Rosencreutz. The influence of the time in Les soirées de Saint-Petersbourg (St. Peters-
Fama Fraternitatis (1614), followed by a Confessio burg evenings, 1821), the first socialists were
(1615), then by the Chemical Wedding of Christian awaiting the Age of the Spirit, from Richard Owen
Rosencreutz (1616), was considerable in the Ger- (1771-1858) to Pierre Leroux (1797-1871, one of
manic world of the Holy Roman Empire during the the first to use the term ésotérisme) and the Saint-
Thirty Years War. The main author, > J. Valentin Simoniens of Enfantin (1796-1864) who were
Andreae, was a Lutheran, studying theology at preparing the coming of the Feminine Messiah. >
Tiibingen and seeking a hero destined to head Eliphas Lévi, the master and inspirer of occultism
the Evangelical Union. The Calvinist prince Chris- in the second half of the roth century, had been

--- Page 390 ---
POLITICS AND ESOTERICISM 966
active in the revolution of 1848 and raised Fascism of Mussolini, before being expelled from
Napoleon to the stature of a social Messiah; like Cefalu by the latter. > Julius Evola went further,
Maistre, Lévi thought that the prophecies ever basing his hopes for the return to a traditional soci-
since Antiquity would be realized in the roth cen- ety on Fascism, then on National Socialism.
tury, at the moment when their esoteric meaning While Stalin tolerated the presence of “Russian
became evident. In the Western world as a whole, Cosmism”, a heritage of Theosophy, around the
there was an apparent contradiction between the physicist Sakharov, Himmler’s S.S. quickly sloughed
progress of public debate essential to the new dem- off the esoteric and mystical pretensions of some of
ocratic citizenship, and the growth of numerous its members, as soon as they tried to exceed a purely
and influential secret societies, preparing in the decorative role.
shadows for the times to come. The theory of A special place must be assigned to > René
occult sciences, preserved in the secrecy of the sanc- Guénon, whose radical rejection of the Modern
tuaries, was an essential key for explaining the World (1927) and move to Islam had no small
delay in the coming of the Spirit, of which democ- influence on esoteric conversions in Europe and
racy was considered the visible, social form. The North America, through the intermediary of the
people’s lack of education explained the delay, but universalist Sufism of Ibn ‘Arabi (1165-1240). In
thanks to progress, the truths safeguarded “under the Muslim world, disquieted by Westernization,
a bushel” would appear in the light of day. this example from the West fostered a return to
This new view of the relationship between past indigenous traditions, and sometimes a fundamen-
and future dominated the political visions of > talist interpretation of the sacred texts.
Madame Blavatsky and > Annie Besant as succes- Finally we should mention the importance of
sive heads of the ~ Theosophical Society. For denunciations, found throughout history, within
Blavatsky, it concerned the relations between East the triangular relationship of the political, the reli-
and West during the colonial period; for Besant, the gious, and the esoteric: the political institution typ-
messianic function of woman. The same attitude ically denounces esoteric religion as a cult, whilst
also underlay the mental constructs of fringe the religious institution denounces the subversion
masonry, conceived as the secret laboratories of of the state by the esoteric society.
tomorrow’s world. In the Latin countries they were
often revolutionary, with the Italian Carbonari Lit.: Jean-Pierre Laurant, “Politique”, in: Jean Servier
fighting for national unity, or the French Charbon- (ed.), Dictionnaire critique de Ilésotérisme, Paris:
nerie plotting against royal power. In Great Britain P.U.F, 1998 ¢ Joscelyn Godwin, Arktos: the Polar
and Germany they actively opposed the “establish- Myth in Science, Symbolism and Nazi Survival, Grand
Rapids: Phanes Press, 1992 @ Massimo Introvigne, I/
ment”, as for example the para-masonic organiza-
Cappello del Mago, Milan: SugarCo., 1990 ¢ Robert
tions of the > Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn
Vanloo, L’'Utopie des Rose-Croix, Paris: Dervy, 2001
and the > Ordo Templi Orientis. In the U.S.A. the ¢ Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke, The Occult Roots of
success of the Rosicrucian movements beginning Nazism, Wellingborough: The Aquarian Press, 1985 ¢
with > Paschal Beverly Randolph was also marked Marco Pasi, Aleister Crowley e la tentazione della poli-
by this double face, turned Janus-like towards the tica, Milan: FrancoAngeli, 1999 ¢ Politica Hermetica
past and the future. (annual), Lausanne: LAge d’ Homme, 1987-.
A number of new religious movements, particu-
larly in the > “New Age” category, owe to roth JEAN-PIERRE LAURANT
century esotericism the association of technical
with human progress in a context of occultist spec- Pordage, John, * 1607/8 London,
ulations. But the same legacy has also included a t 10.12.1681 London
rejection of Western individualistic civilization;
and this all the more easily since the Christian reli- The son of a London merchant, Pordage was
gions have steadily abandoned the field, leaving born in 1607 or 1608 and entered Pembroke
it Open to esotericism. The totalitarian systems, College, Oxford, in 1623. It is possible that
though not fulfilling a function that can be com- he obtained a diploma of doctor of medicine at
pared with the association of esotericism and Oxford in 1640, but some scholars doubt this
socialism in the first half of the roth century, (Hutin 1960, 82). In any case, he was not destined
seemed to some to have a natural affinity with eso- to practice medicine, but to be an exemplar of
teric thought. > Aleister Crowley combined his homo religiosus. Pordage entered the order of the
rejection of British society with a marked interest Anglican Church and was made vicar of the church
first in the Stalinian system, and then in the Italian of St Lawrence’s at Reading in 1644. Soon, under

--- Page 391 ---
967 PORDAGE
the auspices of + Elias Ashmole, he was made rec- About this time, Pordage was tried before the
tor of the rather wealthy parish at Bradfield, a posi- local Anglican commission as an heretical minister
tion he held until 1654. of the faith. Against him were arrayed a whole
At Bradfield, Pordage’s wife, Mary Freeman, an range of charges, including provocative statements
especially pious and spiritual woman whom he and immoral conduct. Pordage was able to defend
married for that reason, began to have visionary himself well against all these charges: the suppos-
experiences. Soon Pordage himself was experienc- edly provocative or heretical statements imputed to
ing remarkable phenomena as well, including him he proved to have been taken out of context
angelic apparitions, and these were also witnessed and misinterpreted; the charge that he had kept a
by other members of a small prayer group of mistress in London he demonstrated to be quite
theosophers who had gathered around Pordage false. Having exonerated himself from the accusa-
and his wife. This group eventually came to include tions, he was allowed to continue as a minister
men like Thomas Bromley and Edmund Brice — from 1649 to 1654. But in 1654 Pordage was tried
both of whom were educated at Oxford and them- again on the same charges, and despite his eloquent
selves wrote theosophic treatises — and women like rebuttal he was removed from his ministerial posi-
Anne Bathurst and Joanna Oxenbridge, both tion at Bradfield. One of the chief accusations was
women of high society who have left us records of ‘that he hath very frequent and familiar converse
their spiritual journeys with the Pordages. with Angels’, and that when he was attacked by a
Pordage’s visionary experiences began in August demon in his home, ‘his Angel stood by him and
of 1649, with an opening of the visionary worlds in upheld him’. Further, it was held against him ‘that
which he was approached by a spirit, a giant, anda Mrs Pordage and Mrs Flavel had their Angels
great dragon with ‘great teeth and open jaws’ that standing by them also, Mrs Pordage singing
‘oft ejected fire at me’. Pordage would have been sweetly, keeping time on her breast, and that his
overcome by terror, he wrote, had he not been ‘sup- children saw the spirits coming into the house, and
ported in an extraordinary way, by the Ministra- said, look there, Father... And the whole roof of
tions of the Holy Angels’ (Imnocencie, 72-73). This the house was full of Spirits’ (Immocencie, 14-15).
opening of the worlds was the revelation to The hostile atmosphere in which Pordage’s sec-
Pordage and his family of the good and evil invisi- ond trial took place can be gathered from his
ble realms: Pordage and his family believed that account of the judge’s rancor. Pordage did have
they saw at first hand the Mundi Ideales, or invisi- legitimate reason to be upset, for even the very act
ble realms, one full of love, the other of wrath. under which he was being tried was itself not insti-
The wrathful realm was evidently quite unpleas- tuted until a full year after those things with which
ant: Pordage and his family, he wrote, witnessed he was charged had reputedly taken place. In such
not only the presence of evil hierarchies — in mon- an atmosphere, one is hardly surprised to find
strous theriomorphic forms, all “misshapen”, with Pordage on trial, since he was adamantly a non-
cat’s ears, cloven feet and fiery eyes — but also their juror. He defended himself in a moving peroration,
physical manifestations such as sulphuric foul asking his fellow ministers what harm he had
odors and even the imprint of their images on caused them, especially since he did not proselytize
the windows, ceiling, and chimney of the house. or even criticize them, but only sought to live a
He and his wife, being unable to remove these reclusive life. Nonetheless, he was convicted and
various images from the chimney by using wet removed from the ministry (Imnocencie, 79).
cloths, finally resorted to smashing them off with Although he was deprived of his livelihood and
hammers (75). found himself in extremely difficult circumstances
But Pordage writes that he also passed through for the remainder of his life, these outward difficul-
the flames and entered into paradise, which he calls ties only served to intensify his, and his group’s,
the Mundus Luminosus. Here he encountered convictions and inward life. Their persecution did
‘multitudes almost innumerable, of pure Angelical mean that for some years they felt they lived spiri-
spirits, in figurative bodies, which were clear as tually in the ‘outer darkness’ surrounded by wrath;
the morning-star, and transparent as Cristal’ (75). but eventually they were restored to angelic com-
He saw the rare beauty of these beings, felt the munications and to the spiritual light. Yet until his
inexpressible joys and harmonies of heaven, death, Pordage and his small group kept them-
smelled delightful heavenly scents, and heard celes- selves out of public view so as to avoid censure.
tial music. The ‘tongue can hardly express these After the Restoration under Charles II in 1660,
Odours of Paradise’, and these glorious visions and when suspended clergymen were allowed to return
sounds, he writes. to their positions, Pordage did not take this step,

--- Page 392 ---
PORDAGE 968
but remained quietly with his group of fellow sibles, viz, the Archetypous Globe (1683). The
theosophers. As a leader of a small, private, non- Treatise of Eternal Nature offers a general intro-
Anglican religious group, Pordage had, however, to duction to the concept of Eternal Nature, the ‘first
be discreet, especially after 1664 when such non- original and true ground of all created beings and
conformist meetings were again outlawed, and so of all true knowledge’ (Preface). Outward, phys-
their leaders ran the potential risk of fines and ical nature, then, has its origin in an archetypal,
imprisonment. Worse, the years 1665 and 1666 pure realm of “Eternal Nature” similar to the Pla-
saw the advent of the Great Plague and the great tonic realm of Ideas or Forms. Thus Divine Nature
London fire, seen by many as signs of the Apoca- is ‘hid in Nature, as a Jewel in a Cabinet’; it is man-
lypse (fears intensified by the associations of the ifested in the Seven Essential Forms, and has its ori-
number 1666 with the number of the Beast in Rev- gin in the Abyssal Nothing, which is the ‘ground of
elation). Many people fled London, and Pordage all Essences, and yet no Essence to be seen in it’,
and his group had to return to Bradfield, returning the ‘fruitful Mother of all Things’ (105, 107). In
to London only in 1668, the year Pordage’s wife Pordage’s treatise, then, we see a visionary hierar-
died. chy or ascent from the natural world to the arche-
This time of outer difficulty also saw what is in typal, to the Seven Essential Forms (the qualities
some respects the most important affiliation of informing existence), to the Abyssal Nothing of
Pordage’s life: the one with > Jane Lead, who first God Himself.
felt called to join his group in 1663. She remained In Theologia Mystica, we travel with Pordage
a member of his group, and in fact assumed leader- on his visionary journey. Lead wrote effusively
ship, especially after April 1670 when, after her of Pordage’s rich spiritual life, and wrote of
husband’s death, she experienced a vision of the ‘those wonderful Transportations he had (or
Holy Virgin Sophia, who called her to a virginal life rather they had him) for the space of three
(Fountain 1.17). From this point on, she began to weeks together ... His outward Body lay in pas-
write a large number of extraordinary visionary sive Stillness in this visible Orb’ (7). Pordage offers
treatises, and became a central theosophical figure. us ‘a copie taken out from the Original .. . of all
In 1674 she moved into Pordage’s own house, at his Worlds’, which he had seen in visionary trances
request, so that together they could form a more that sometimes lasted weeks at a time. According
powerful spiritual union. Pordage died on Decem- to Pordage, all the different realms or “worlds”,
ber 10, 1681. including this “visible Orb” of physical nature, are
From the early 1670s until his death, Pordage comprised within the sphere of “Eternal Nature”.
wrote most of his elaborate, lucid, and concisely Eternal Nature includes the ‘Four Elementarie’
expressed metaphysical treatises. All these treatises worlds: the ‘outward visible world’ below; the
were based wholly and directly on his own spiritual ‘Dark-fire’ or wrath-world of hell on the left; the
experience, exemplary of which is the treatise ‘Fire-Light’, or ‘Severe World’ in the center; and
Sophia, which consists of twenty-two daily journal the Light-Fire World, or Paradise, on the right.
entries dated from 21 June to 10 July, and which Above them is the ‘Angelical, Heaven, or Love-
contains biographical data from the year 1675. World’. Thus Eternal Nature encompasses all the
Pordage’s magnum opus, Gdttliche und Wahre possible realms of creation, including heavenly,
Metaphysica (Holy and True Metaphysics) was paradisal, hellish, and earthly.
also written during this time, and was probably Pordage employs the images of the Globe, the
concluded in the year of his death. But none of Eye, the Heart, and the Breath to explain vision-
these works were published during his lifetime and, ary spirituality, and the supreme illumination (31).
even more surprisingly, only two were published in This illumination is essentially a vision of the
English after his death. Although all his works had Archetypes of all things, which the visionary per-
a wide private circulation, and were extremely ceives in the divine Eye within the ‘Abyssal Globe’
influential in both England and on the Continent, of Eternity (34). Pordage’s treatise is structured as
it remains a strange fact that Pordage’s primary a progressive revelation of the Globe of Eternity,
works — albeit written in English — were published of the divine Eye within it that perceives itself, and
only in German, and have been accessible only in of the Eye in the divine Heart that is at the center of
that language to the present day. the Globe, in which one may behold God ‘Face to
We can begin with the two works published Face’ (37-38).
in English: A Treatise of Eternal Nature with Her Pordage then writes of the Virgin Sophia, who is
Seven Essential Forms (1681) and Theologia Mys- ‘co-essential’ and ‘co-eternal’ with the Holy Trin-
tica, or the Mystic Divinitie of the Aeternal Invi- ity, but not ‘co-equal’ with them: she is but a pas-

--- Page 393 ---
969 PORDAGE
sive efflux of the Trinity, its Glory and Mirror (68- of will, senses, and above all, inward freedom.
69). Finally, Pordage writes of the nature and qual- They are powerful, good, immortal, and made in
ities of the angelic spirits. The spirits possess a the likeness of God.
materiality and senses of their own: ‘These Spirits We should note one angelic characteristic
are endued with a Spiritual kind of materiality Pordage emphasizes: the nature of their bodies. He
from the Love-Essence in the Heart of God’. The writes that the angelic body is organic or has func-
spirits have their own language; they have one ear, tional limbs, and is in many things like man, or
one eye, one breath (details that underscore their rather, man is in his outer form made in the image
unity) and their ‘food and drink’ is power from the of the angels (II.iv.12). He writes of angelic noses,
Trinity (87, 92). Pordage’s treatise therefore leads mouth, ears, eyes, and so forth; and though
us from the initial vision and cosmology, through Pordage refers to the traditional cherubim and
the transmuting power of Sophia, into the angelic seraphim of the Dionysian hierarchy, he makes it
heavenly realm itself. clear that his knowledge of angels comes not from
In his treatise Sophia — which was extremely having read Pseudo-Dionysius Areopagita, but
influential for German theosophers, including > from having visited with angels, whom he is
Gottfried Arnold, whose own book on the Virgin describing.
Sophia was drawn in part from Pordage’s — Pordage’s third volume treats of the dark or
Pordage offers his experiential knowledge of wrathful world. He discusses the nature of demons
Sophianic revelation in a journal form, dated 21 or fallen angels, finstern magia (black magic), sor-
June to ro July, in twenty-two chapters. Neither the cery, the ‘Hellish Tincture’, the devil, the ‘spiritual
dates nor the number of chapters are accidental. Babylon’, and the spiritual Egypt. But his third vol-
Pordage begins by explaining the nature of Sophia, ume does not dwell only on evil and wrath; later in
or Divine Wisdom, as well as of the Light World, the volume he writes of the ‘heavenly Tincture’,
and the soul’s hunger and thirst for spiritual truth. and the Community of Spirits (Gemeinschaft der
He discusses the meaning of the Biblical references Geister), topics closely reminiscent of his friend
to the creation of a “new heaven and a new earth”; Thomas Bromley’s work The Way to the Sabbath
the harmony of this world below and that above; of Rest. He discusses “Eternal Nature” and the
the Paradisical Eden in the Soul; and the Quintes- three courts of the Globe of Eternity we mentioned
sence or Elixir of Life. Pordage explains that the earlier, as well as the ‘eternal heart of God’ (Von
Holy Virgin reveals the New Jerusalem in the heart dem ewigen herzen Gottes), the Virgin Sophia or
and soul of the newly reborn man, and he com- Wisdom, the Seven Forms or Spirits of God, and
pletes his work by discussing knowledge of the the Angelical World.
light and dark worlds. Any list of Pordage’s primary works must
In his magnum opus, the three-volume Gdttliche include two others, written in the last few years of
und Wahre Metaphysica (Divine and True Meta- his life: the Vier Tractatlein (Four Little Tractates),
physics), Pordage discusses these light and dark and the “Treatise on the Philosopher’s Stone”. The
worlds in detail. The breadth of this work is quite “Four Tractates”, dated 3 August 1676, discuss
remarkable; around two thousand pages long, the ‘outer birth and fleshly life of Jesus Christ’,
Pordage’s Metaphysica reveals the realm of eternal the ‘Mystical and Inner Birth’, the Spirit and
nature, the wrathful world, the paradisal realm, Degrees of Faith, and, finally, experimental (expe-
and the angelical world in clearly organized sec- riential) discoveries of the union of nature,
tions. His work is explicitly visionary: Pordage essences, tinctures, people, and spirits (Experimen-
writes that it derives not from reason alone, and is tale Entdeckungen von Vereinigung der Naturen/
not like that of the Platonists, but emerges ‘out of Essenzen/ Tincture/ Personen und Geister). In this
what my eternal understanding spirit with its eyes last section on “experiential discoveries” we are
has seen revealed of the Angelic centri’ (II.ii.26). introduced to foundations for the “Treatise on the
Pordage’s first volume discusses the ‘Spirit of Philosopher’s Stone”, a very concise alchemical
Eternity’ and Eternal Nature, asserting that God work.
permitted the Fall of his creatures in order to reveal The “Treatise on the Philosopher’s Stone”,
his barmberzigkeit (compassion). In the second only sixteen pages long, is a remarkable works of
volume, Pordage outlines aspects of the angelical spiritual > alchemy. In it, we see how theosophers
spirits (Englische geister) including their immortal in general and Pordage in particular drew on
nature, their possession of a “materiality” different alchemical terminology and process to explain
from that of the physical world (including an theosophical transmutation and revelation. Essen-
Angelic body), their inward unity, their possession tially, Pordage sketches here the process by which

--- Page 394 ---
PORDAGE 97°
the human being is purified, transmutes his ener- 279, 281 « idem, Johann Georg Gichtel, Théosophe
gies from wrath into love, and becomes an illumi- D’Amsterdam, Paris: UAge d’Homme, 1975, 43, 66,
70 @ Serge Hutin, Les Disciples anglais de Jacobnated and unified being. He points out that fallen
Boehme aux XVII¢ et XVIII* siécles, Paris: Editions
man is subject to the influences or energies of Mars
Denoél, 1960, 82-89 ¢ Rufus M. Jones, Spiritual
and Venus, or anger and lust (emotional attraction Reformers in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries,
and repulsion rooted in selfishness) (7). Eventually London: Macmillan, 1914, 227-230 @ Nils Thune, The
there comes the harmony of the planetary qualities, Behmenists and the Philadelphians: A Contribution to
Saturn, Mercury, Mars, Venus, and Luna; the the Study of English Mysticism in the 17th and 18th
process culminates in the ‘milk and blood of the Centuries, Uppsala: Almquist and Wiksells, 1948, 33-
66, 152-170 ¢ Arthur Versluis, “Christian Theosophic
Virgin’, the ‘Pearl of the Virgin’, and ultimately
Literature of the Seventeenth and Eighteen Centuries”,
the unity and harmony of the planetary qualities
in: W.J. Hanegraaff and R. van den Broek (eds.), Gno-
within the individual, who is suffused with spirit- sis and Hermeticism from Antiquity to Modern Times,
ual light (11-16). The treatise ends with the Albany: SUNY Press, 1998, 217-234 ¢ idem, Theo-
‘Pearl of the Virgin’, which symbolizes purity and sophia: Hidden Dimensions of Christianity, Hud-
illumination. son: Lindisfarne, 1994, 104-105, 167-172 ¢# idem,
On the whole, Pordage is the single most impor- Wisdom’s Children: A Christian Esoteric Tradition,
Albany: SUNY Press, 1999, 39-56, 172-173, 200-201,
tant English theosopher of the 17th century. His
242-244 # idem, Wisdom’s Book: The Sophia Anthol-
works were very influential for such figures as ogy, St. Paul: Paragon House, 2000, 65-106.
Gottfried Arnold and, much later, Vladimir
Solovyov, particularly in his explication of male
ARTHUR VERSLUIS
and female tinctures and his lucid discussions of the
virgin Sophia and of his visionary experiences.
Although Pordage was denigrated for extravagant Postel, Guillaume, * 1510 La Dolerie,
mysticism not only during his lifetime, but by sub- t 6.9.1581 Paris
sequent authors like Rufus Jones (who clearly had
little if any acquaintance with Pordage’s extensive Born in Normandy, to a family of humble tiller-
works), in fact a close study of Pordage’s works men, he came to Paris early at his parents’ death.
reveals their breadth and depth as well as a more Moved by a passionate desire to acquire instruc-
catalogical mind than Boehme’s. Thune (1948), tion and learning, he began by mainly teaching
Hutin (1960), Gibbons (1996), and Versluis (1999, himself in the Liberal Arts and oriental languages,
2003) provide the major discussions of this figure while attending lessons at the Colleges of Sainte
so far, but we remain in need of books devoted to Barbe and Cardinal Lemoine; working there as
Pordage alone. a servant to pay for his education, he is likely to
have met some of the foremost representatives of
Innocencie appearing through the dark mists of pre- the so-called “Pré-Réforme catholique”, who were
tended guilt, London: Calvert, 1655 # Gottliche und precisely teaching at these schools, the milieu of >
wahre metaphysica, Frankfurt: J.M. Hagen, 1715 ¢ J. Lefévre d’Etaples. Gradually, Postel came in
Ein griindlich philosophisch Sendschreiben, Amster-
touch with some well-connected individuals who,
dam, 1698 ¢ Sophia: das ist die holdseelige ewige
impressed by his knowledge, promoted him at the
Jungfrau der Gottlichen Weissheit, London, ca., 1675;
Amsterdam, 1699 ¢ Theologia Mystica, or the Mystic French Court. The first outward indication of royal
Divinitie of the Aeternal Invisibles, viz. the Archety- favour directed towards him consists in his being
pous Globe, London, 1683 ¢ A Treatise of Eternal sent, in a minor diplomatic capacity, to Tunis and
Nature with Her Seven Eternal Forms, London 1681 ¢ Istanbul, on a quest for oriental manuscripts des-
Vier Tractatlein, Amsterdam: R. & G. Wetstein, 1704 tined to enhance the king’s library (Feb. 153 5-June
¢ Jane Lead, A Fountain of Gardens: or, A Spiritual
1537). Back in Europe, he landed in Venice, where
Diary of the Wonderful Experiences of a Christian
he stayed for some two months and came in contact Soul, under the Conduct of the Heavenly Wisdom;
Continued for the Year MDCLXX VIII, London, 1700 with several important Humanists and printers,
¢ Arthur Versluis (ed.), The Wisdom of John Pordage like T. Ambrogio (1469-1540) or D. Bomberg. His
[Theologia Mystica and A Treatise of Eternal Nature} first books (Alphabetum XII linguarum, De
St. Paul: New Grail, 2003. originibus lingua hebraice) appeared in Paris the
following year and caused him to be appointed
Lit.: Brian Gibbons, Gender in Mystical and Occult
“lecteur royal” at the recently founded “Collége
Thought: Behmenism and its Development in England,
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1996, 8-9, 106-113, 119, trilingue” in 1539. As soon as 1540, the first inti-
143 @ Bernard Gorceix, Flambée et Agonie: Mystiques mations of a profound and lasting spiritual crisis
du XVII siécle allemand, Sisteron: Présence, 1977, manifested themselves, which — coupled with his

--- Page 395 ---
971 POSTEL
growing disillusion with courtly life, due to the found confirmed at every page of the Zohar and
sudden disgrace of his main protector, Chancellor numerous other kabbalistic texts he was actively
Poyet —led him to the decision to renounce worldly meditating, translating or actually composing (Or
honours, official positions and the benefices they ha-Menorah, 1548) during this venetian sojourn.
entailed. He then became convinced of having From the Summer of 1549 until after Easter 1551,
heard divine voices, summoning him personally to Postel — sponsored by his friend Bomberg — trav-
dedicate his life to the pursuit of establishing a uni- elled to the Middle East and visited Jerusalem.
versal religious concord. After a last, unsuccessful When he disembarked again in Venice, “Mother
attempt to persuade King Francis I of the necessity Johanna” was dead; and a few months later in
of reforming his kingdom and court, in the face of Paris, at the Epiphany of 1552, Postel experienced
impending divine anger, and having written his his famous “immutation”, during which, having
important De orbis terre concordia during the undergone severe illness, interpreted by him as the
Winter 1543-1544, Postel left Paris for Rome, occasion for drastic spiritual purification, he con-
where he arrived in March 1544, to try and join the vinced himself to have incorporated her “celestial
newly formed Company of Jesus. He remained in body” and, thus, to have become substantially her
that city until the Spring of 1546, in the meantime son and that of Jesus-Christ, the first-born of the
ordained as priest by the Vicar General of the city, second Adam and the second Eve!
F. Archinto (1495-1558), but ultimately rejected After several more trips across Europe, which led
(Dec. 1545) by the Jesuits on account of his stub- him to Besangon, Basle and Vienna (where he
born personal messianic convictions, and_ his actively collaborated in the eventual printing, in
unwillingness to recant his opinion about the deci- 1555, of the first Syriac New Testament), our man
sions of the Council being intrinsically superior to found himself yet again back in Venice, where he
that of the Pope, as well as about the universal asked for an inquisitorial court to examine his
monarchy being ultimately devolved to the king of works. At first he probably reckoned with the
France (two ideas quite unsavory, to be sure, to court’s leniency, since it was headed by his old
Ignatius of Loyola and his first —- mostly spanish — acquaintance, F. Archinto. As it turned out, he
companions!). Free, henceforth, to move about as barely escaped with his life by being officially
he pleased, Postel went to Venice (end of 1546), declared insane, and spent the following four
first taking up residence at the “Ospedaletto san years in a roman prison. Eventually released by a
Zanipolo” (hospital St John and Paul) as chaplain popular upheaval following the demise of Pope
and meeting there a woman he was soon to call Paul IV (1555-1559), he resumed his peregrina-
his “Madre Zuana” (Mother Johanna) and the tions throughout Europe (Basle again, Augsbourg,
“Venetian Virgin”. Ministering to the poor and the Italy, Lyon) before settling anew in Paris (1562).
orphans in the care of this establishment, living an The first of his two final great bouts of spiritual
intense mystical life (including the reception of the exaltation occurred in 1566, the year of the famous
stigmata), endowed with visions and prophetic rev- “miracle of Laon” (a public exorcism operated
elations, she appears to have shared with Postel with the help of the Eucharist), to which Postel
certain views concerning the religious concord and dedicated several tracts upholding the event as
imminent “restitution” of mankind. demonstrative of Roman Catholic views on the
Having elected him as her confessor, she con- sacrament, as opposed to the Protestant tenets he
firmed his personal claims to an eschatological role knew well, having opposed them all his life. The
(that of “angelic pope”, already announced by second occurred in 1573, when he briefly came
Joachim of Fiore) while convincing him, at the under the spell of yet another woman, a widow
same time, of her profound spiritual wisdom and of named Marie Villeneuse, who claimed to have been
the veracity of her intuitions, notwithstanding her made pregnant by the Holy Ghost (!). A few years
mundane illiteracy. Soon, our man identified her later, he died peacefully under the regime of mild
with the feminine messiah, due to reveal and open confinement he had been sustaining for years at the
the penultimate era of the so-called restitution, of monastery of St Martin des Champs, having perse-
which he considered himself the “first-born”, by vered with his private teaching, writing and pub-
regenerating the yet unredeemed lower part (also lishing almost until the end.
feminine!) of the human soul. They were in con- The range of Postel’s thought is much too
tact for approximately 18 months, and Postel complex, intricate and far-reaching to bear syn-
was to remain a lifelong enthusiast of his “Venetian thesizing here. Apart from the afore-mentioned
Virgin”, whose private revelations (including, of themes of the universal concord and “restitution”,
course, those concerning his own mission) he the acknowledged two main pillars of his doctrine

--- Page 396 ---
POSTEL 972
are the “kabbalistic” theories relating to the mens so much concerned here with theology and rational
Messi and revolutio animarum. But before we exegesis as with the dynamic integration of such
start examining them briefly, two essential features patterns into his own personal, tense mystical out-
of our author’s intellectual personality should look. Underlying all this is his unflinching quest for
constantly be borne in mind. First, each and every experiential wisdom, which takes for him the
of his favourite tenets, as well as the ideas bor- exacting guise of imitatio Christi. Thus, instead of
rowed from — at a pinch — Plato or the Jewish kab- merely indulging in speculations about them, he is
balah, > Cusa or > Ficino, he (re)interprets and led to immerse himself in the symbolic and mythi-
wields in strict dependance on the hazards of his cal dimensions of themes like the feminine messiah
own inner life, and what he firmly considers his or the transmigration of souls, inseparable from his
ultimate spiritual calling. For instance, his gift for messianic claims and, accordingly, given an actual
languages he sees as a “sign” of his commitment to expression as concrete stages or episodes of his
bring about religious concord (through books and own spiritual life. According to Postel, therefore,
preaching . . . and the Crusade !), and his capacity the imitatio Christi resides in the accomplishment
of actually writing down huge tomes in a relatively of the substantial embodiment of divine wisdom,
short time becomes a token of his inspiration from an idea in perfect accordance with Pauline views on
above. We are actually dealing with a man who did the subject, if perhaps too literally understood.
not hesitate to claim himself (and the Venetian Vir- Thus it is that Postel attributes the name mens
gin) to be portrayed in certain medieval sculptures Messi to what he sees as being the fundamental
appended to the northern portal of the church of archetype of such an embodiment, ‘the immobile
San Marco, sculptures which he believed had been Godhead communicating itself to the mobile [and
originally commissioned by Joachim of Fiore him- tangible] world and elements’, an entity of consid-
self, in order to herald his future mission! erably ambiguous ontological status, as we have
Another, omnipresent aspect of his thought is his already said. Inspired by esoteric speculations
obsession with the “fourth term”, as he likes to call about the Messiah contained in different passages
the divine immanence within the corporeal side of of traditional Jewish texts (Bereshit Rabba and
nature, which he envisages as the most complete the kabbalistic Shaare Orah, in particular), Postel
and perfect expression of the Godhead, whose ends up equating his mens Messie with the “fourth
ultimate raison d’étre resides in the spiritualiza- term” mentioned above, which is supposedly
tion of the entire material creation. “Substance”, instrumental in conferring existence upon every
here, is the key word and it is quite literally that singular living being. This “superior soul of the
Postel understands the substantial participation of Messiah” is for him identical with the (divine) Law
the christian brethren (indeed, of all mankind) in (or divine/created wisdom, that is: applied to the
the “mystic body” of Christ, or the “consubstan- creation), the universal — active and passive — Intel-
tiality” of his own kinship with Jesus and Mother lect, ‘esprit de Jésus par la Maternité générale du
Johanna, conceived more or less along the same monde [Mother Johanna] faisant sa finale action
lines (and mutatis mutandis, of course) as the dans le corps’. It is also the spiritual source of
doctrine of the conversion of substances in the inspiration common to all prisci theologi, at work
Eucharist. Precisely, the ontological gap between behind their respective doctrines, and accounts for
the Godhead and physical nature is bridged by this Postel’s constant preoccupation with the quater-
“fourth term”, which he calls “created wisdom” nary, and > number symbolism in general, whether
(related to divine wisdom, i.e. Christ, as ‘one side envisaged from a theological or a cosmological per-
of a coin to the other’), “first spirit of all things” spective (the merkavah of the vision of Ezechiel
and “mother of the world”, and identifies for these and the pythagorean tetraktys).
reasons with the Venetian Virgin herself, the ‘lower Holding fast to his now familiar Christological
part of the substance of Jesus-Christ’. Some of the focus, Postel interprets the revolutio animarum
names or images (daughter, etc.) Postel uses to (hebrew gilgul, or metempsychosis [> Reincar-
describe this particular, half-divine entity, he actu- nation]|), an important notion in both Greek and
ally derives from the Zohar, an esoteric midrash- Jewish ancient cultures, as based on the anima
like commentary on Scripture, replete with myths, Christi. Distinct, nevertheless, from the mens Mes-
symbols, sexual imagery, applied to the cosmolog- sie, this “lower soul of the Messiah” revolves, ever
ical levels as well as to the inner processes of the since Adam, through all biblical prophets, like
divine realm and attributes. Although he is of Noah or Elijah, up to John the Baptist (an esoteric
course hard put to reconcile such elements with and, simultaneously, quite literal interpretation of
trinitarian metaphysical conceptions, Postel is not I Peter I, 14). Separated from their upper part at the

--- Page 397 ---
973 POSTEL
time of the Flood, the two “halves” of this soul Ficino to Campanella’. Yet, a passage from his De
have animated the two lineages of Japhet and admirandis (1549, f. 216r°; see bibliography) does
Sem, i.e. that ofthe first- and second-born of Noah, provide a strange overtone in this respect: men-
until they were again harmoniously conjoined in tioning the angelic powers ascribed to different
Jesus-Christ and a potiori in his later feminine countries and areas of the globe (a very ancient
advent. Whether male or female, each human topic, always dear to him ever since the De orbis),
being must undergo a similar psychic process of Postel adds [aggregatis omnibus mundi Geniis]
purification, by which his/her “upper soul” (mens sicut nunc mihi reconciliavi per magni nominis dei
and/or spiritus) reverts back several times into a virtutes. Such an assertion could easily be con-
body after death in order to be finally reunited with strued as alluding to an operation of “angelic (or
its predestined lower counterpart (animus and/or kabbalistic) magic”, the kind of which Postel might
anima). Only when these spiritual preliminaries are have considered necessary within the context of his
achieved may the “restitution” be manifested. The mission, to ensure — for example - the cooperation
preservation of the lower human soul is for Postel of the so-called Genii in bringing about the univer-
both the goal and esoteric meaning of Christ’s sal Christian persuasion or concord. Given the iso-
descent to Hell (motivated by the necessity of lated and somewhat enigmatic character of the
redeeming all lower souls held captive there, sentence, one must of course remain wary of the
including his own!), and explains the fundamental temptation of actually reading too much into it; but
role of woman in accordance with the Jewish law the question seems worth raising.
of the Levirate. Thus the circulatio animarum, the As regards > alchemy, Postel — who intended to
keystone of which is the anima Christi, is made the live in strict poverty and, anyway, led a mostly
foundation of the spiritual right of the “first-born”, peregrine existence — obviously never dedicated
an idea central to Postel since it symbolizes for him himself to the actual pursuit of the philosopher’s
the whole, divinely preordained cosmic harmony, stone. Certain general themes, widespread in the
before Satan introduced confusion in the world literature pertaining to the Art, like the role of the
and in human lineage(s) as well, by inducing man elements in cosmogony or the seminal analogy
and woman to sin. First-born par excellence, Jesus between incorruptible gold and terra pura, he
appears on Earth as (humanly) descended from the nonetheless frequently adapted to cosmological or
second-born since “the first will be last” and he has even mystical speculations of his own, thus antici-
come to set things back in their primordial place. pating — along with others — a trend which became
Self-proclaimed first-born of the “restitution”, as famous later, albeit in a very different manner, with
the substantial son of the second Adam and Eve, it > Jacob Boehme.
was therefore inevitable that Postel should also Postel’s influence may be considered long-stand-
have claimed possession of an enlightened upper ing and, perhaps paradoxically, both discreet and
soul; accordingly, in a book published as soon as significant. On the one hand, the greater part of his
1547 (Panthenosia), he already announced his own works remained unpublished (some were lost),
(re)endowment with the (illuminated) “reason” of or rapidly became very scarce on account of the
Adam before the Fall, and of the prophet Elijah, small number of copies printed; most were more or
who enjoys full understanding of all things and will less tacitly considered unreadable, either because
reunite them ultimately. The Venetian Virgin, of their size (De orbis) or because of the obscurity
whom he met precisely at that time, could but of their contents (or both!). Almost all smacked of
evince even higher privileges, while instructing him heresy, first and foremost among them the small
into the most arcane mysteries and entrusting him French (Les trés-merveilleuses victoires des femmes
with their ulterior public revelation, when the time du nouveau-monde, Paris 1553) and Italian (Le
would be ripe for such a course of action. Each of prime nove dell’altro mondo; II libro della divina
these three figures, then, narrowly linked to the ordinatione, Padua 1555) tracts dealing with the
“restitution”, has been granted in some measure Venetian Virgin, in which the author really seemed
reunion of his/her lower soul with that of the mes- to evince unacceptable claims. On the other hand,
siah, and is thus rendered capable of assuming an some of the cosmographical treatises enjoyed new
eschatological role. printings during the 17th century (De universitate,
Absorbed in his very personal Christian ap- Cosmographice discipline compendium) and the
proach, in paupertate, probro et dolore, Postel three small books - important for the author’s
seems unlikely to have been attracted at all by > esoteric thought and all published by J. Oporin
magic — even “spiritual” — or theurgy, as were so in 1547 — Panthenosia, Clavis absconditorum, De
many of his colleagues and predecessors, ‘from nativitate Mediatoris ultima, difficult but seemingly

--- Page 398 ---
POSTEL OTA
more accessible, did exert a certain influence on (zoor) ¢ M.L. Kuntz, Guillaume Postel: Prophet of
several circles linked to the rosicrucian movement the Restitution of all Things. His Life and Thought,
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1981 # eadem (ed.), Postello, Venezia
[> Rosicrucianism], as well as on a number of
e ilsuo mondo, Florence: Olschki, 1988 # eadem, “The
theosophers and mystical reformers like Jacob
Virgin of Venice and Concepts of the Millennium in
Boehme’s famous disciple and biographer, Abra- Venice”, in: J.R. Brink, A.P. Coudert, M.C. Horowitz
ham von Franckenberg (1593-1652). The roth (eds.), The Politics of Gender in Early Modern Europe,
century French and English occultist movement, > Kirksville (MO): Sixteenth-Century Journal Publish-
Eliphas Levi en téte, was up to a point cognizant of ers, 1989, 111-130 @ J.P. Laurant, “Postel vu par le
Postel’s ideas and often acknowledged him, albeit XIX°® siécle occultisant”, in: Guillaume Postel 1581-
1981 [Proceedings of the International Avranches
improperly, as one of its forefathers.
Conference], Paris: G. Trédaniel, 1985, 183-187 @ J.F.
Although he was (and still is) rightly celebrated Maillard, “En quéte d’un public: Les affres de G. Pos-
as an important Christian kabbalist, besides being tel”, in: M. Jones-Davies (ed.), L’auteur et son public
a remarkable linguist and cosmographer, Postel’s au temps de la Renaissance, Paris: Klincksieck, 1998,
focus always remained on the imitatio Christi and 121-145 # Yvonne Petry, Gender, Kabbalah and the
on his self-appointed mission. For the most part, Reformation: The Mystical Theology of Guillaume
esotericism (including of course kabbalah) is for Postel (1510-1581), Leiden, Boston: E.J. Brill, 2004
C. Postel, Les écrits de G. Postel publiés en France et
him but a tool meant to discover “proofs” of his
leurs éditeurs (1 5 38-79), Geneva: Droz, 1992 @ F. Rou-
(and Mother Johanna’s) messianic role featured in daut, “Nouvelles annotations de G. Postel”, Nouvelle
Scripture, and in the Jewish and Platonic tradi- Revue du XVI° siécle 15:1 (1997), 215-33 @ EF. Secret,
tions; at the same time, and conversely, his “resti- Bibliographie des manuscrits de Guillaume Postel,
tution” enables him to publicly reveal their real and Geneva: Droz, 1970 ¢ idem, Postelliana, Nieuwkoop:
ultimate signification(s), of which he alone (by B. de Graaf, 1981 ¢ idem, “Alchimie, palingénésie et
métempsychose chez Guillaume Postel”, Chrysopaeiadivine favour) has a universal grasp —a typical mys-
3:1 (1989), 3-60 # idem, Hermétisme et kabbale,
tical reformer’s attitude.
Naples: Bibliopolis, 1992 ¢ idem, Postel revisité —nou-
velles recherches sur G. Postel et son milieu (Premiere
Interprétation du Candélabre de Moise [Or nerot ha- série), Paris-Milan: $.E.H.A.-Arché, 1998 ¢ P. Simon-
Menorah, Venice, 1548] (EF. Secret, ed.), Nieuwkoop: celli, La lingua di Adamo: G. Postel tra accademici
B. de Graaf, 1966 ¢ Le Thresor des prophéties de e fuoriusciti fiorentini, Florence: Olschki, 1984 ¢
Punivers (F. Secret, ed.), The Hague, 1969 Apologies C. Vasoli, Filosofia e religione nella cultura del Rina-
et Rétractions (F. Secret, ed.), Niewkoop: B. de Graaf, scimento, Naples: Guidi, 1988, 323-60 ¢ G. Weill,
1972 ¢ Sefer Jezirah: Ubersetzt und kommentiert von F. Secret, Vie et caractére de G. Postel, Milan-Paris:
G. Postel (reprint ed. Paris, 1552; W.P. Klein, ed.), Arché-Les Belles Lettres, 1987.
Stuttgart-Bad-Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1994
¢ De summopere [along with: Le miracle de Laon, by
JEAN-PIERRE BRACH
J. Boulaese] (I. Backus, ed.), Geneva: Droz, 1995 ¢
De admirandis numerorum platonicorum secretis
(J.P. Brach, ed. & french trans.), Paris: J. Vrin, 2001 ¢ Prayers > Hymns and Prayers
De usu finali quinque corporum regularium . . . (J.P. (Gnostic and Hermetic)
Brach, ed.) in: S$. Matton (ed.), Documents oubliés sur
Valchimie, la Kabbale et G. Postel offerts a F. Secret,
Geneva: Droz, 2001, 233-244. Prisca Theologia > Tradition
Lit.: §. Akerman, Rose Cross over the Baltic: The
Spread of Rosicrucianism in Northern Europe, Leiden, Prodicus, 2nd cent.
Boston, K6ln: E.J. Brill, 1998, 173-195 ¢@ EF. Bacchelli,
“Palingenio e Postel”, Rinascimento 30 (1990), 309-
Prodicus was a Gnostic teacher [> Gnosticism]
315 @ I. Backus, “G. Postel, T. Bibliander et le Proté-
of whose life nothing is known. > Clement of
vangile de Jacques”, Apocrypha (1995), 7-65 ¢ J.P.
Brach, “‘Deux en une seule chair’: G. Postel et le messie Alexandria and Tertullian, who are our primary
féminin”, in: Féminité et spiritualité [Cahiers du sources (both about 200 A.D.), almost exclusively
G.E.S.C., n° 3], Milan-Paris: Arché, 1995, 35-42 ¢ speak about the ‘followers of Prodicus’, and when
idem, “Dieu fait femme: G. Postel et illumination they mention his name it is only as the representa-
vénitienne”, in: M. Cazenave (ed.), La face féminine de tive of the movement that was called after him.
Dieu, Paris: Noésis, 1998, 41-61 ¢ C.G. Dubois, La
This might be an indication that Prodicus was not
mythologie des origines chez G. Postel: De la naissance
their contemporary but that he had lived earlier a la nation, Orléans: Paradigme, 1994 W.P. Klein,
“Christliche Kabbala und Linguistik orientalischer in the 2nd century. According to Clement, Stro-
Sprache: Das Beispiel von G. Postel (1510-81)”, mateis, Ill, 30, 1 and VII, 41, 3, the followers
Sprachtheorie und germanistische Linguistik 11 of Prodicus called themselves “Gnostics”. This

--- Page 399 ---
975 PSEUDO-DIONYSIUS AREOPAGITA
self-designation can also be concluded from the whole aeon. Of course, Clement interpreted this
beginning and end of Tertullian’s Scorpiace. In 1, 5 being above the law as a permit to unbridled licen-
he says that in times of persecution the “Gnostics” tiousness, but he was evidently unable to prove this
and the Valentinians [> Valentinus and Valen- allegation and, therefore, suggested that the Prodi-
tinians| deceive the simple believers by saying cians committed adultery in secret, afraid as they
that Christ has died once for all and that it is were of being caught, condemned and punished.
against God’s will to die for Christ. In 15, 6 these ‘How could licentiousness and foul language be
two groups are hinted at again, but now by men- characteristic of a free person?’ (Strom. III, 30,
tioning the name of their founders. He then imag- 2-3). It seems more probable, however, that the
ines how ‘a Prodicus or a Valentinus’ might have Prodicians, just as the Valentinian pneumatics con-
tried to dissuade the apostle Paul from his martyr- sidering themselves ‘saved by nature’ and as such
dom, suggesting that one ought not to confess elevated above the laws of the Creator, adhered to
before men, the more so because God did not thirst high moral principles and even to an ascetic way of
after human blood and Christ did not ask retribu- life. Whether they also rejected marriage and the
tion for his death. begetting of children can not be settled with any
It is impossible to assess whether the followers of certainty. That the Prodicians considered them-
Prodicus are identical with the “Gnostics”, who selves by nature the sons of the First God may have
according to Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses, I, 29, led them to the rejection of prayer. In a discussion
adhered to a Gnostic system which resembled to a of the importance of prayer, Clement, Strom., VII,
great extent that of the Apocryphon ofJohn. Ter- 41, 1-6, says that those around Prodicus taught
tullian, Adversus Praxean, 3, mentions the Valen- that one should not pray. He does not want to
tinians and Prodicians as heretics who introduced interrupt his argument by a refutation of the
not one God as opposed to the Creator, as > ‘unholy Gnosis of those Gnostics falsely so called’,
Marcion did, but more. This suggests that Pro- but nevertheless he sometimes seems to respond to
dicus, like most other Gnostics, taught a divine the arguments of the Prodicians. They apparently
Pleroma, which in itself agrees with the doctrine argued, as also Clement does, that ‘God knows
exposed in Irenaeus, AH, I, 29. The followers of those who are worthy of the good things or who
Prodicus boasted that they possessed secret books are not; therefore he gives every one what is
of > Zoroaster (Clement, Strom., I, 69, 6), as did befitting him’. But, Clement says, from this we
the Gnostics behind the Apocryphon of John should not conclude that prayer has no sense:
(NHC II, 19, 8-ro: ‘If you wish to know then, it is ‘Petitionary prayer is not superfluous, even if the
written in the book of Zoroaster’). For the other good things are given without request. For exam-
tenets of the Prodicians, discussed below, there ple, thanksgiving and prayer for the conversion of
are no parallels in Irenaeus I, 29-30 and the his fellow men are the specific tasks of the true
Apocryphon, and therefore, the correspondences Gnostic’.
between these texts and what we know of Prodicus
O. Stahlin (ed.), Clemens Alexandrinus, Vol. 2:
are insufficient to establish with certainty the
Stromata Buch I-VI, 4th rev. ed. by L. Friichtel, mit
identity between the followers of Prodicus and Nachtrage von U. Treu; Vol. 3: Stromata. Buch VII und
Irenaeus’ Gnostics. VIII, Excerpta ex Theodoto. Eclogae propheticae.
According to Clement, Strom., III, 30, 1, the fol- Ouis dives salvetur. Fragmente, 2nd ed. by L. Frichtel
lowers of Prodicus claimed to be ‘by nature sons of und Treu, Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1960-1985 ¢
the First God’, which gave them a strong sense of Engl. trans. by W. Wilson in ANCL, vols. 4 and 12,
being above the law. ‘Thanks to their noble descent Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 1867, 1869 (repr. ANF, vol. 2,
Edinburg/GrandRapids: T&T Clark/W.B. Eerdmans,
and their freedom they live like they want, but they
1994) @ A. Reifferscheid & G. Wissowa (eds.), Scor-
want to live in pursuit of pleasure. For they believe piace, in: Tertulliani Opera, CCL, I (= rev. ed. of CSEL,
that nobody rules them, since in their view they are vol. 20 [1890]), Turnhout: Brepols, 1954 Engl. trans.
lords of the Sabbath and royal sons of higher birth by S. Thellwall, in: ANCL, vol. 11, Edinburgh: T&T
than the whole race of men. For the king, however, Clark, 1869 (repr. ANF, vol. 3, Edinburgh/Grand
they say, the law is unwritten’. This idea of the Rapids: T&T Clark/ W.B. Eerdmans, 1993).
Gnostics as a royal race without a king above them
ROELOF VAN DEN BROEK
is also found in other Gnostic texts, for instance in
the Apocalypse of Adam, NHC V, 82, 1o9ff., which
says that ‘the generation without a king’ was Pseudo-Dionysius Areopagita >
elected by the saviour in order to shine upon the Dionysius Areopagita, Pseudo-

--- Page 400 ---
RAGON DE BETTIGNIES 976
Ragon de Bettignies, Jean-Marie rituals in France occasioned his publications on
(Jean-Marie de Venise, Comte Marie the degrees of “Rose Cross”, “Kadosh”, Appren-
de Venise), * 1781 Bray-sur-Seine tice, Fellow Craft, and Master, as well as on the
rituals of adoption. All of this was presented as his-
(Seine et Marne), ¢ 1866 Paris
torical adaptations of an eternal “masonic ortho-
doxy” (L’Orthodoxie magonnique, 1853). Ragon The author of Tuileur général de la Franc-
links this occult masonry with an esoteric Chris-maconnerie (General Tyler of Freemasonry, 1861),
tianity, which he had experienced as “Vicaire pri-like E-T.-B. Clavel (1789-1852) or Thory (1759-
matial” in the Johannite Church of Chatel, in La1827), was a living memorial of French > Freema-
Messe et ses Mystéres comparés aux Mystéressonry from its reconstitution after the Empire up
to its secular development in the second half of anciens (The Mass and its mysteries compared to
the roth century. Ragon’s passage through fringe- the ancient mysteries).
masonic organizations with occultist tendencies,
Cours philosophique et interprétatif .. ., Paris: Berlan-
such as the Rite of Misraim (which he left in
dier, 1841 @ La messe et ses mystéres, Nancy, 1842 ¢
1816), esoteric churches like that of the Abbé
Orthodoxie magonnique, Paris: E. Dentu, 1853 ¢
Chatel (1795-1857), or the Neo-Templar [> Neo- Franc magonnerie, manuel complet de la magonnerie
Templar Traditions] order of > Fabré-Palaprat d’adoption ou maconnerie des dames, Paris: Col-
(1773-1838), made him a prominent figure in the lignon, 1860 # Franc maconnerie, rituel de royale
French intellectual and spiritual landscape. Little is Arche, improprement appelé rite d’York, Paris: Col-
known of his life. He was treasurer at the general lignon, 1861 Franc maconnerie, tuileur général ou
manuel de l’initié, Paris: Collignon, 1861 ¢ Manuel
revenue office of Bruges in 1803, at the time of his
bibliographique des sciences psychiques ou occultes,
masonic initiation into the lodge “La Réunion des Paris: Lucien Dorbon, 1912.
Amis du Nord”, then senior clerk at the headquar-
ters of the national guard of Paris in 1815, when Lit.: André Combes, Histoire de la Franc-Maconnerie
he founded the lodge that would become famous au XIX® siécle, Monaco: Editions du Rocher, 1998,
under the name of Trinosophes. He then published vol. 1, 121 # Claude Rétat, “Ragon de Bettignies”,
Renaissance Traditionnelle, forthcoming March 2005.the periodical Hermés (1818-1819), a sort of
annual of reviews of masonic sessions and festi-
JEAN-PIERRE LAURANT
vals, before leaving with some friends for the
U.S.A. He reappeared in Paris around 1835; in the
1860s he lived in the Clignancourt area (18th Randolph, Paschal Beverly,
arrondissement). By then he was considered a * 8.10.1825 New York City,
great personality and authority of the order, pub- T 29.7.1875 Toledo, Ohio
lishing his rectifications in the Bulletin du Grand
Orient de France. Most of his publications post- Black American visionary and spiritualist whose
date his return from America; he brought back, work transformed the passive and severely limited
in particular, a work on the degree of the Royal perspective of roth-century American > spiritual-
Arch ... contenant une étude sur... l’esprit de la ism by emphasizing active pursuit of individual
Franc-Magonnerie aux Etats-Unis (containing a progress and realization through practical tech-
study on the spirit of Freemasonry in the U.S., niques — in Randolph’s case, the use of drugs, magic
1860). Ragon’s work combines second-hand inter- mirrors and sexuality. Born impoverished and ille-
pretations of the origins of the order in Antiquity gitimate, he grew up on the streets as an orphan,
with expositions of the meanings of degrees and rit- with minimal education. He took up, in turn,
uals. He goes back as far as Eleusis, Memphis in employment as a bootblack, cook, cabin boy and
Egypt, and India in his quest for the sources of ini- barber. Despite this background and the disadvan-
tiation — an initiation as imagined by the first theo- tage of his color in the period surrounding the
rists of esotericism. His Cours philosophique et American Civil War (1861-1865), Randolph trav-
interpretatif des initiations anciennes et modernes eled several times to Europe and the Near East. In
(Philosophical and interpretative course on ancient later life he became known as an orator and, for a
and modern initiations, 1841) was reprinted in time, politician, and wrote numerous tracts and
1860; he stressed the initiatic synthesis that was more than 25 books, including very readable nov-
able to unite the biblical masons with the Tem- els, most of which are still kept in print by Rosi-
plar or Egyptian masons, this capacity being a crucian groups claiming descent from his original
pledge of agreement between peoples. During the occult foundations.
same period, the secularization of the high-degree By Randolph’s own account, he had been a seer

--- Page 401 ---
O77. RANDOLPH
from childhood and haunted by the spirit of his which by that time had developed strong elements
mother, who had died in the pesthouse at Bellevue of occultism [> occult / occultism] and active mag-
Hospital when he was seven years old. This experi- ical practice; and he became familiar with the
ence led him to embrace spiritualism as it swept the established European traditions of magic mirrors
United States after 1848, and he became an ardent (scrying), -> Rosicrucianism, theosophic specula-
apostle of the new teachings. After some early tion and > magic that he was to make use of on
experience in other forms of mediumship, he set- his return to America. It is impossible now to
tled down as a trance medium, delivering commu- ascertain with certainty the members of this occult
nications from the spirits of the dead while underworld whom Randolph encountered on his
unconscious and totally under the spirits’ control travels. He mentions various minor spiritualist
and influence. During his incessant travels over the luminaries of the time, now forgotten, but also
northeastern United States in the early 1850s, in the novelist > Edward Bulwer-Lytton, > Hargrave
support of spiritualism, he claims to have delivered Jennings (the author of dense compilations on the
more than 3000 speeches in this manner. In 1855 secrets of a supposed sect of phallic-Buddhist Rosi-
he traveled to England to deliver the message of crucians), and Baron Dupotet de Sennevoy (fore-
the spirits to the World Convention sponsored by most among the French Mesmerists and users of
Robert Owen in London; but he was not allowed magical mirrors). There also is reason to believe
to speak because the socialist Owen, though a that Randolph moved in the circle of British scryers
believer, feared that Randolph (and spiritual- that included Frederick Hockley, K.R.H. Macken-
ism) would bring ridicule on his political cause. zie and Robert H. Fryar — although Randolph’s
During this entire early period, Randolph is distin- fully developed system of using mirrors taught the
guished from other contemporary mediums only student to view the wonders of the magic mirror
by his energy and enthusiasm. The communica- himself, rather than relying on the second-hand
tions delivered by him through his spirits appear to revelations of an entranced seer.
have been standard issue: reassurances of post- With respect to the Near East the situation is
mortem existence, consolation of the bereaved, even more obscure. The names of the teachers
and pleas for general social reform in this world Randolph says he learned from on his travels are
(woman’s rights, anti-slavery, and the like). meaningless to historical research, and their sta-
By the mid-1850s, Randolph had begun to real- tus is ambivalent as well. Like the Rosicrucians
ize the limitations of spiritualism, especially its Randolph claimed to have met in Europe, they
unchallenged assumption that the communicating existed ‘on both sides of the grave’, i.e. on the mate-
spirits were always those of dead humans, and he rial plane as well as in what Randolph called the
had become painfully conscious of the dangers of “soul world” (the vast cosmos of beings and
passivity with respect to the controlling spirits. worlds that Randolph believed stretches beyond
As his personality shifted radically under the this earth and humanity to include a bewildering
control of the various spirits (usually well-known hierarchy of the born and never born: including
American political reformers and radicals, but spirits, angels, seraphs, Arsaphs, Eons, Arsasaphs,
occasionally a spirit calling himself “Zoroaster”), Arch-Eons, Antarphim and so on). For Randolph,
he became, as he himself admitted, insane. After after he returned from his travels, the crucial junc-
failing in his attempts to take his own life, he fled ture between the realities of everyday life and this
abroad again, to England and Europe in 1857- visionary cosmos inhabited by these creatures of
1858, where his spiritualistic seances garnered vision lay in the Rosicrucians. They were not sim-
him a degree of recognition and a reputation for ply the Rosicrucians of history. Rather, they were
instability. On this and a subsequent trip in 1861- supernal, evolved beings, some human and some
1862, he also traveled to the Near East, where he never human, who cloaked their activities and
encountered what he called the “Ansairee” — the presence on earth under the name of Rosicrucians
Nusa’iri of Syria, whose secretive ways had excited while playing a larger role among the celestial hier-
European interest since the 1780s — and the Rosi- archies — a role that the neophyte Rosicrucian was
crucian Brotherhood whose teachings he propa- invited to undertake as well. Chief among these
gated for the remainder of his life. celestial Rosicrucians was the Egyptian Ramus
In England and France, Randolph exhibited his (or Thotmor), “Chief or Grand Master of the
powers as a medium, producing wonders and Superlative Order of Gebel Al Maruk” - known
apparitions that were duly noted in he press. He in Christian lands as the Order of the Brethren of
also traveled in the more complex world of Mes- the Rosie Cross, and in America and Europe,
merism [> Animal Magnetism] and clairvoyance, where it still thrived, as the “Imperial Order of

--- Page 402 ---
RANDOLPH 978
Rosicrucia”. On his travels Randolph also learned motto on his return to America became “Try!”, an
of the power of hashish and other psychoactive injunction reiterated, perhaps not coincidently, by
drugs (datura, opium and others) which he called the Masters of > H.P. Blavatsky in the early days of
by the Arabic name dowam meskh and soon the > Theosophical Society.
began importing in quantity into America for their Crucial to Randolph’s vision of the world was
visionary properties. the notion not only of hierarchies, but of compet-
In 1858, on his return from his first trip to the ing hierarchies of the Brothers of the Light (the
Near East, Randolph included what he had learned Rosicrucians) and the Brothers of the Shadow (evil
in his most masterful theoretical book, Dealings men and celestial entities who had renounced or
with the Dead. While confusing and ambiguous in lost the chance to progress by seeking evil goals,
places, it is clearly the product of Randolph’s lived and now remained only to hinder mankind). In this
experiences rather than of mere learned research or idea Randolph obviously found the explanation of
hearsay. It burst like a bomb on the limited world his own troubled life and insanity, but the same
of contemporary spiritualism, and revealed to notion also underlay the meta-explanations later
stunned American spiritualists the glories of man offered by the Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor,
the immortal spirit who was invited to progress C.G. Harrison, ~ René Guénon and others to
through myriads of worlds and incarnations in a explain the development of spiritualism in the
never-ending struggle toward self-consciousness, r9th century: behind the apparent facts of spiritu-
spiritual power and divinization. Far from a sim- alism was the “hidden hand” of these mysterious,
ple world in which living humans communicated competing brotherhoods, which acted through
with their deceased brethren in the Summer Land Randolph, Blavatsky and others to achieve their
through the offices of mediums, the world Ran- occult goals.
dolph revealed was a breathtaking vista of over- The success of Randolph’s Rosicrucian work
arching hierarchies in which man could actively on his return to America was hampered, as always,
struggle to progress through clairvoyance devel- by his race and his instability, but also by the
oped by use of drugs and magic mirrors and, most Civil War. In the last years of the war, Randolph,
importantly, by techniques of sexual magic. These who had always been ambivalent about his race
techniques were circulated only in privately printed and frequently denied it (claiming Persian or
tracts and in manuscript, and consisted basically in Madagass origin), had momentary success as a
ritual preparations leading to sexual intercourse, Black politician and a teacher for the Freedmen’s
designed to put the student in direct contact Bureau, educating newly-freed slaves in New
with the celestial hierarchy. It is possible that they Orleans. In late 1865, he set up in Boston as a
also included a form of sexual intercourse between physician specializing in sexual problems, and
the neophyte Rosicrucian and celestial entities founded what he called the first School of Clair-
themselves, but there remains some unclarity on voyance. To this period belong his numerous works
this point. on human affection and sexuality (all designed as
Randolph gave various explanations for the enticements to inquire about his more profound
sources of this sexual magic, attributing it at times secret teachings), Seership! (1870), and Hermes
to the Nusairi of Syria and at other times to his Trismegistus: His Divine Pymander (1871), a
own creativity. Whatever the source, however, the reprint of Dr. Everard’s 17th-century translation.
effect of such techniques was powerful and they After losing everything in the great Boston fire of
were the secret that underlay the various Rosi- 1872, Randolph moved to Toledo, Ohio, where in
crucian groups that Randolph began to organize 1874 he published what some regard as his mag-
after 1861, first in San Francisco, then in Boston num opus, Eulis, named after the last and highest
and other American cities. All of these were short- degree of his teachings on sexual magic. The same
lived, but their influence endured in other magical year he tried for the last time to found an order,
groups, such as the ~ Hermetic Brotherhood of with a group of students in San Francisco, but this
Luxor in the 1880s and the circles around Maria de grandly named “Triplicate Order of Rosicrucia,
Naglowska in Paris in the 1920s and 1930s. Most Pythianae and Eulis” came to nothing.
importantly, they survived in the recognition that In his later years, Randolph became increasingly
man’s role in the spiritual world was an active one depressed and paranoid, and turned to alcohol for
that required the neophyte to put forth the full relief. On July 29, 1875, shortly after his return
effort of his “Imperial Will” in order to progress — from San Francisco, he shot himself in Toledo, in a
a commonplace idea now, but novel in the spiritu- fit of jealous rage over the supposed infidelity of his
alist world of the 1860s and 1870s. Randolph’s wife — a suicide that later occult history has trans-

--- Page 403 ---
979 REGHINI
formed into death in an occult duel with Mme. Reghini was born in Florence and got a degree
Blavatsky. in mathematics at the prestigious University of
Pisa. While still a student he struck up a life-long
The Rosicrucian (P.B. Randolph), Dealings With The friendship with the musician Amedeo Armentano
Dead: The Human Soul, Its Migrations And Its Trans- (1886-1966) who inspired him to investigate
migrations, Utica, N.Y.: Mary J. Randolph, 1861 ¢
Italy’s longstanding Pythagorean traditions. He
P.B. Randolph, The Wonderful Story of Ravalette:
took an early interest in the revival of esoteric Also, Tom Clark and his Wife: Their Double Dreams
and the Curious Things that Befell Them Therein; or, studies in Italy, long dormant due to disapproval
The Rosicrucian’s Story, New York: S. Tousey, 1863 ¢ by the Catholic Church. In 1896 he went to Rome
idem, Seership! The Magnetic Mirror. A Practical to meet Isabel Cooper-Oakley, the delegate of
Guide to Those Who Aspire to Clairvoyance-Absolute. the + Theosophical Society, and in 1898 was
Original and Selected from Various European and Asi- among the first founders of the Italian branch of
atic Adepts, Boston: Randolph Publishing Co., 1870 ¢
the Society.
idem, Eulis! The History of Love: Its Wondrous Magic,
In the pre-war years he was active on the Floren- Chemistry, Rules, Laws, Modes, Moods and Ratio-
nale; Being the Third Revelation of Souland Sex. Also, tine literary scene, contributing to the avant-garde
Reply to “Why is Man Immortal?” The Solution to the magazine Leonardo with its mixture of philosophy,
Darwin Problem. An Entirely New Theory, 2d [and esotericism and admiration for the Risorgimento.
only surviving] ed., Toledo, Ohio: Randolph Publish- He also founded the Philosophical Library, regis-
ing Co., 1874 ¢ Maria de Naglowska (transl.), Magia
tered as a public institution.
Sexualis, Paris: Robert Télin, au Lys Rouge, 1931.
Reghini became a Freemason in Florence in 1903.
Lit.: John Patrick Deveney, Paschal Beverly Randolph: A few years later a split developed in the Grand Ori-
A Nineteenth Century Black American Spiritualist, ent for a variety of reasons, among which were
Rosicrucian and Sex Magician, Albany: SUNY Press, objections to overly close links between Freema-
1996 ¢ Joscelyn Godwin, “The Hidden Hand”, Theo- sonry and leftwing politics and to a decline of inter-
sophical History 3:2-5 (April 1990-January 1991), est in the esoteric quest. This led to the formation
35-43, 66-76, 107-117, 137-148 @ Joscelyn Godwin,
of the Grand Lodge, which Reghini supported. In
Christian Chanel and John Patrick Deveney, The Her-
r911 he was among the founders of the Italian
metic Brotherhood of Luxor: Initiatic and Historical
Documents of an Order of Practical Occultism, New Philosophic Rite. After Mussolini came to power,
York: Weiser, 1995 ¢ J. Gordon Melton, “Paschal Reghini called attention to himself by supporting
Beverly Randolph: America’s Pioneer Occultist”, in: the nationalist stance of the new government while
Jean-Baptiste Martin & Francois Laplantine (eds.), criticising the powerful Catholic wing of fascism.
Le défi magique I: Esotérisme, occultisme, spiritisme, However, the new regime promoted the campaign
Lyon: Presses Universitaires de Lyon, 1994, 115-129.
which led to the prohibition of Freemasonry at the
end of 1925. Reghini, then Grand Chancellor, was
JOHN PATRICK DEVENEY a signatory of the decree by which the Grand Lodge
declared its own dissolution as a precautionary
Reghini, Arturo, * 12.11.1878 Florence, measure (the Grand Orient had done likewise; how-
T 1.7.1946 Budrio ever, this did not prevent a wave of anti-Masonic
persecution and confiscation of property). After
Reghini was a key figure in early 2oth century collaborating with Reghini in the early 1920s in
Italian esotericism, playing a major role in restor- Atanor and in the Group of Ur, Julius Evola later
ing the spiritual traditions of > Freemasonry, and denounced him in the fascist press. Reghini left
above all in reviving Pythagoreanism. His books Rome to settle in a small town near Bologna, where
and articles cover a variety of subjects including he conducted research on Pythagorean mathemat-
Masonic symbolism, theosophy [-> Theosophical ics until his death in 1946.
Society], -- Neoplatonism, ~ Agrippa and > The magazines Atanor and Ignis represent a
Cagliostro. As editor of the magazines Atanor and landmark in Italian esoteric culture. Atanor,
Ignis he published articles by > René Guénon. He published in 1924, contains articles by Reghini
also stimulated the interest of esoteric author > shedding new light on Pythagoreanism and the
Julius Evola (1898-1974) in the spiritual quest, Egyptian Rites of Cagliostro. The board of editors
despite the profound divergences between the two included the well-known Neapolitan esotericist
men; Reghini was forced to retire from public life ~ Giuliano Kremmerz. There were contributions
because of his Masonic connections and anticleri- by Guénon as a result of the close contacts of
cal stance, while Evola joined in the anti-Masonic Reghini’s friend, Armentano, in the occult societies
campaign fostered by the fascist regime. of Paris. Ignis (1925 anda last issue in 1929), while

--- Page 404 ---
REGHINI 980
continuing this line of study, reflected the pre- transcendent ancestral village or acommon pool of
occupation about the increasing intolerance being vital energies. In the course of time, this element
shown by the fascist regime for non-Catholic spir- leaves the pool or the ancestral village and enters
itual traditions. Here his biting irony, typical of the embryo of a future member of the clan, very
the Florentine pre-war literary magazines, did little often of a grandson. Being associated with the tran-
to attenuate the polemics aroused by what was scendent life-stock of the community, it is revered
becoming a full-blown anti-esoteric campaign as a particularly sacred or even “divine” presence
conducted by clerical-fascist publicists, anxious in the human being. Sometimes such beliefs are
to smooth the way towards the Concordat be- coupled with an ethical principle and it is said that
tween Church and State. Besides his research on after the demise of the body the “soul” or whatever
Pythagorean mathematics and articles on Masonic it may be called has to undergo rites of purifica-
symbolism, Reghini wrote a detailed and valuable tion. These may also be executed by the bereaved
introduction to Cornelius Agrippa. community on behalf of the dead person’s “spirit”.
Ethnologists disagree whether these beliefs and
Atanor 1924 (reprint), Rome: Atanor, n.d. ¢ Ignis practices can be viewed as parallels to classical
1925-1926 (reprint), Rome: Atanor, 1980 ¢ Amedeo theories of transmigration, but classical concepts
Armentano, Massime di scienza iniziatica, Ancona: can easily be interpreted as elaborations on these
Ignis, 1992 # Arturo Reghini, Le parole sacre e di
pre-literate traditions.
passo dei primi tre gradi ed il massimo mistero mas-
sonico, Rome: Atanor, 1981 ¢ idem, I numeri sacri Even in the absence of written testimonies it is
nella tradizione pitagorica e massonica, Rome: Ignis, quite likely that in pre-literate Greece or Greater
1947 # idem, Dei numeri pitagorici: Prologo, Ancona: Greece some local communities held similar con-
Ignis, 1991 ¢@ idem, “Vintolleranza cattolica e lo victions. We know indeed that in some places a
Stato”, in: Paganesimo Pitagorismo Massoneria, newborn baby was given the name of the grand-
Furnari: Editrice Mantinea, 1986.
father, most probably because people recognized in
Lit.: Natale Mario di Luca, Arturo Reghini: Un intel- him a new “incarnation” of the deceased member
lettuale neo-pitagorico tra Massoneria e Fascismo, of the clan. It may be that theories of transmigra-
Rome: Atanor, 2003 ¢ Roberto Sestito, I/ figlio del tion ascribed by tradition to itinerant “Orphic”
Sole: Vita ed opere di Arturo Reghini filosofo e mate- shamans, magicians and soothsayers hail in truth
matico, Ancona: Associazione Culturale Ignis, 2003 ¢ from local beliefs and practices.
Dana Lloyd Thomas, “A Modern Pythagorean”,
The oldest written testimony about reincarna-
Gnosis 44 (Summer 1997), 52-59 ¢ idem, “II tempio
assalito: Introduzione allo studio della campagna tion is due to the poet Pindar (ca. 518-438). In the
antiesoterica nell’Italia fascista”, Politica Romana 5 second of his Olympian Odes he celebrates the vic-
(1998-1999), 253-300. tory Theron, the tyrant of Akraga (today’s Agri-
gento in Sicily) had won in the Olympic games. In
DANA LLOYD THOMAS lines 57-80 he describes in rather dark language the
fate of the dead. There are three groups: the wicked
Reincarnation I: Antiquity suffer frightful punishments in the under-world,
and the good will be blessed with a carefree exis-
Reincarnation, or metempsychosis, metensoma- tence in the company of the gods. There is also a
tosis, transmigration, is the belief in the passing group of people who will keep themselves free from
of a spiritual being, the soul, after death into some wrongdoing during three successive lives and who
other body. The four terms quoted are synony- will finally reach the Islands of the Blessed where
mous, although “reincarnation” is sometimes they will enjoy everlasting happiness. It has been
improperly reserved for the passing of the soul into suggested that this latter theory is based on local
a specifically human body, whereas “metempsy- traditions current at Akraga; stating that a spiritual
chosis” and “transmigration” are said to include entity passes through various purificatory bodily
animal or vegetal bodies. In fact, this distinction stages, it is at any rate not very far away from our
does not hold for classical theories. model of pre-literate beliefs and practices observed
There is a wide-spread belief among pre-literate all over the world.
societies that each human being possesses one or Reincarnationist ideas are firmly attributed to
several spiritual vital elements, “souls” or “spirits” the ancient sage Pythagoras (6th century) and to
— whatever they are called in indigenous languages. his disciples. It is said that Pythagoras, observing
At death, these elements are believed to disperse, someone beating a dog, stopped him because he
each one to its appropriate abode — or to disappear recognized in the dog the soul of a dead friend.
altogether. However, at least one of them joins the In later times people made fun of him pretending

--- Page 405 ---
981 REINCARNATION I
that he knew his former and future lives over ten more widely known. Nevertheless, they were never
or twenty generations, including many passages universally accepted. Critical thinkers like the
through animal bodies. sophists and Aristotle later on dismissed them with
We tread on safer ground when we come to disdain. It may be that the critics were vaguely
Empedocles (ca. 490-435), an important physicist, aware of the folkloristic origin of these beliefs.
philosopher and divine. He hailed from Akraga But the most powerful and influential defender
in Sicily, so we might assume that his ideas about of the soul and of reincarnationist theories was
reincarnation or transmigration are derived from yet to come: Plato (ca. 428-348). Taking up Empe-
the same local traditions as the section in Pindar’s docles’ story of the soul’s divine origin, fall and
second Olympian Ode mentioned above. Influ- restoration, he completed and refined it. Using
ences from wandering Pythagorean sages may also narrative, a mythos (Phaedrus, 248-256), to bring
be at work. Empedocles taught that souls are pre- home his ideas, Plato teaches that originally the
existent and divine. Being in the grip of a meta- souls were not only enjoying divine beatitude along
physical agent called Strife they commit murder with the highest gods but that they lived among
and other sins and are condemned to purify them- the eternal ideal Forms. The intellect (nous), the
selves in the course of many existences. Empedo- noblest part of the soul, was contemplating the
cles states that he himself had been a boy, a girl, a everlasting models of Goodness, Beauty, Courage
shrub, a bird and a fish, and had attained an out- and Justice which form the ideal spiritual world.
standing degree of spiritual power, but that he Souls enjoyed this bliss, not in isolation but in spir-
would still have to undergo some more births until itual company and unity. But they could not sustain
his soul could again attain its original status among eternal bliss. In spite of the intellect’s attraction for
gods and immortal heroes. It is important to note the wonderful Forms, a kind of boredom coupled
that transmigration is valued negatively as a pun- with the agitations of desires and other emotions —
ishment, as a type of suffering in a world which the lower parts of the soul — caused dissensions and
itself is nothing but suffering. One of Empedocles’ made them fall from their enviable status. So they
main poetic works bears in fact the title Purifica- were condemned to suffer corporeal, physical life.
tions. His model of transmigration turns out to be Imprisoned in various bodies, chased from one
ascensional: it is return to the lost divine status. The birth to another, souls still have dim memories
metaphysical agent Strife being the cause of vio- of their former bliss and of the ideal Forms they
lence and killing among living beings, Love, the had contemplated. Whereas the intellect strives
second metaphysical principle, will be the ethical for renewed admission to the original felicity, the
guide for incarnate souls. Souls being found every- lower powers of the soul act rather as impediments
where, in humans a well as in animals, the way of which try to keep it tied to the material world. The
purification will be a path of non-violence, a path good life which alone can guarantee progress in
of complete abstention from killing and from future births is thus a constant fight for transfor-
animal food. mation of bad desires into positive energies, as for
It may be noted that Empedocles’ depreciative instance transformation of physical eros into eros
perspective on the necessity of reincarnation is for Beauty and Justice. The end of the struggle is
somewhat akin to Indian theories where the per- again release from the necessity of rebirth and rein-
spective of reincarnation engenders anguish and tegration into the wonderful spiritual domain of
suffering. However, Indians never admit that rein- eternal happiness. We may also mention the Myth
carnation as such may ultimately lead to full salva- of Er found at the end of the dialogue The Repub-
tion of the soul. With the Greeks, the purpose of lic which narrates a kind of “near death experi-
transmigration is, fundamentally, to allow sullied ence”: in the nether world the hero, called Er, is
souls to purify themselves and thus to regain their present at a general convocation of souls some of.
initial divine condition. In India, the process of which had undergone punishment and purification
reincarnation has never begun and will never end during 1ooo years whereas others had sojourned in
by itself. It goes on until the soul is disenslaved heaven. All these souls have to choose a new life;
by an initiatory rite or by a liberating experience forgetting their past experiences they are indeed
which acts as it were “from outside”. There is thus sent to the new birth they have chosen. Plato’s doc-
a very marked difference between Indian and Greek trine of reincarnation is fundamentally Empedo-
ideas of reincarnation. clean. It differs from his predecessor’s mainly on
Returning to Greece, we see that in the sth cen- two points: it identifies several powers or functions
tury B.C. beliefs about the soul and her destinies which make up the soul — joining, incidentally,
received more elaborate developments and became archaic beliefs about various vital elements in the

--- Page 406 ---
REINCARNATION I 982
human being — and it offers a more vivid descrip- spirituality. Their over-all conviction was that
tion of its ascensional career. Christ, risen from death, was their Saviour who
Plato’s philosophy has shaped large areas of delivered them from moral slavery and who guided
hellenistic and greco-roman cultural and religious them through the troubles of this world to eternal
achievements. So we find his teachings about life. It was Christ also who gave them, through His
reincarnation reflected in many pre-Christian and Holy Spirit, true knowledge, gndsis, about them-
Christian systems of practice and thought. They selves and about the mysteries of the heavenly
were apparently introduced as an element of secret domains. It was inevitable that Christians who
lore in several so-called mystery cults. They were were particularly eager to be initiated into full gn6-
eagerly adopted by certain groups of intellectuals sis availed themselves of the manifold treasures of
whose spiritual practice aimed at the realisation hellenistic spirituality. Their quest is documented
of gnosis, transcendental Knowledge. The gnostic in the Christian Gnostic literature (~ Gnosticism),
person identifies with gndsis and becomes part particularly in the writings found in 1945 at Nag
and parcel of the spiritual world. Such gndsis could Hammadi in Upper Egypt.
easily be explained in terms of the priceless knowl- It is a matter of controvery whether the Nag
edge enjoyed by the Platonic soul when after the Hammadi Library and other Christian Gnostic
unavoidable incarnations it enters the heavenly texts contain references to reincarnation. Two
realms, the dwelling places of gods and eternal writings from Nag Hammadi are most relevant in
Forms. this regard. Towards the end of the famous Apoc-
Such were the aspirations of hellenistic groups ryphon of John John asks the risen Lord a series of
in Egypt which produced during the first three questions regarding the fate after death of various
centuries C.E. the ancient ~ Hermetic literature. categories of souls (NHC II, 25,16-17, 30 parr;
One of the Hermetic treatises is called Koré Kos- Synopsis, p. 68ff.). He learns that the souls of true
mou, “Pupil of the Universe”; it contains revela- gnostics will enter the great lights and go to the
tions imparted by the Egyptian goddess Isis to her ‘repose of the heavenly aeons’, i.e. the highest spir-
son Horus. Among other items, Isis talks about the itual realities. The souls that have received the
creation of the blessed souls. Living in heavenly Spirit, but have not risen to perfect knowledge, will
abodes with their heavenly Father-God, the souls also be saved. But the souls which have not received
were asked to fashion creatures out of a certain knowledge at all, over which a counterfeit and des-
substance pepared by the Father. Beginning their picable spirit has gained power, are ‘cast into for-
work with some diffidence, they eventually formed getfulness’ and, when they have ‘become naked’
birds, quadrupeds and reptiles. Having succeeded (after the demise of the body) they will be handed
in their task, they became proud and restive. Find- over to the archons, the gruesome rulers of the
ing that the places which the Father had given them material world who will ‘cast them into fetters’ and
to live in did not allow sufficient liberty of move- ‘consort with them’ until they ‘awaken from for-
ment, they began to desert them. The Father pun- getfulness’ (Synopsis, p. 71, 16ff.). These lines may
ished them with imprisonment in physical bodies simply refer to tortures the soul has to undergo in a
and condemned them to suffer transmigration. In demoniacal world after it has left the body, but they
case they proved guilty of ill-behaviour, they would may also mean that it has to suffer reincarnation
be imprisoned in bodies of animals, and if they con- (‘be cast into fetters’) at the hands of the masters of
tinued doing evil they would fall into ever more the world who will torment it in all possible ways.
miserable depths. But if they did well and obeyed A reincarnationist reading may be be confirmed by
the moral laws, there was the possibility of realiz- the next question: ‘how does the soul become
ing the ascensional career hoped for in traditional smaller and smaller and enter again into the nature
Greek reincarnationist doctrines. The end of it of the mother or the man?’ (72,1off.). The answer
would again be renewed heavenly bliss. Here as is that it will follow illumined souls and finally be
always in the ancient world, reincarnation is but an released by the Spirit, in opposition to yet another
unfortunate intermezzo. This is an outstanding category of souls which will suffer eternal death.
example of Platonic reincarnationist ideas in a hel- Despite the obscurities of this passage we may con-
lenistic Egyptian garb. clude that it can be understood as a description of
Other examples are found in early Christian tra- the destinies of souls after death which follows
ditions. Right from the beginning of their history, more or less the ancient model found in Pindar’s
Christian communities which had not yet elabo- ode: besides those who are saved and those who are
rated a unitary authoritative system of doctrines condemned there are those who after various rein-
were in contact with hellenistic civilisation and carnations reach final beatitude.

--- Page 407 ---
983 REINCARNATION I
In a similar way, reincarnation seems to be contradictory states, ‘now it dies, now it lives
attested in the Nag Hammadi text called The Exe- again’, until Jesus is sent to give it true gnosis.
gesis on the Soul (NHC II,6). It is a kind of novel In » Manichaeism too the theories of ancient
which narrates the destiny of the soul. As long as Greece (e.g. Pindar’s) concerning the soul’s des-
she was with the heavenly Father, she was a virgin. tinies after death were revived. In the Manichaean
But for reasons not mentioned she fell into a body Kephalaia (XXIX, 83,4-8) three paths are open to
and became the victim of ‘robbers’ who passed deceased souls: ‘one to death, one to life, one to
her from one to another, making use of her by force mingling’. Those who have lost themselves in the
or seducing her, until she became a prostitute. At realm of Darkness, are condemned to eternal
the end, deprived of everything, she repented and death; the Elect, the true followers of Mani, go
implored the grace of the Father. Arguably this to eternal Light and to Life, whereas the Hearers,
story describes the adventures of the soul during those who have struggled on in the ambiguous
a single human life-time when she forgets her realm where Light and Darkness are mingled, go
heavenly nature and yields to all sorts of worldly to reincarnation in that very same realm. The
occupations, forgetting and defiling her pure Fibrist, a famous Arabic list of authors and books
inner nature. But it is also possible to cling to a by Aba ’l-Faradj al-Nadim (roth century), has
mythological interpretation. The ‘robbers’ are an important chapter on Manichaeism, with a
then the Rulers of the world, the Archons who keep detailed exposition of the three paths (Fliigel, pp.
the soul ‘for a long time’ in their power, tossing her 69-71 arab. and 1oo-ror transl.; transl. Dodge, II,
about, through the various stages and degrees 796). Similarly, the Acts of Archelaus, a 4th century
which are mentioned in the narrative. These stages Christian work, elaborates on the reincarnation of
could be understood as several reincarnations, people who are still in the world (the Hearers),
similar to what is said about the third category of whereas others are completely lost (Acta-Archel.
souls in the Apocryphon of John. This reading is X, pp. 15-17, Beeson).
perhaps confirmed by another Christian Gnostic It is difficult if not impossible to decide whether
text known already for more than two centuries the Alexandrian theologian Origenes (185-254)
which has been given the title Pistis Sophia. It held reincarnationist views or not. The results
is said in its fourth book that the souls are ‘robbed’ arrived at by very competent scholars are frankly
by the Powers and that they suffer pain through contradictory. Two points seem nevertheless clear.
several successive lives (Pistis Sophia IV,139-141; First: like Plato, Origenes defended the pre-exis-
see other references to reincarnation in I,7 and tence of souls. It was for this doctrine that he was
II, £00). condemned in 553 by the Oecumenical Council of
But it must be admitted that in the Nag Ham- Constantinople. Second: in case he accepted, per-
madi library, evidence for reincarnation is frail. haps temporarily, the logical implication of this
This notion does not seem to have much attracted first point, i.e. the Platonic reincarnation of souls
the authors of that collection of “gnostic” texts. (thus perhaps in his systematic work Peri Archén
They were vitally interested in the final release 1.8,4 and IlI.9,7) he certainly did not attach
which they considered the true gift of the Saviour. importance to it. It is indeed possible to quote him
The doctrine of reincarnation is at best the prelude discarding light-heartedly fantasies about reincar-
to final emancipation, so it could have been dis- nation of souls: ‘it is not taught by the Apostles nor
missed without regret. by Holy Scripture’ (Commentary on the Gospel of
There is nevertheless direct proof that some Matthew, ad 11,13), and ‘We have not found it in
Christians in search of liberating gndsis did believe the Holy Scriptures’ (ib. ad 13,1).
in reincarnation as the last stage before final sal-
G. Fliigel, Mani, sein Leben und seine Schriften, aus
vation. The great theologian > Clement of Alex-
dem Fibrist des Abi ‘l-Faradsch ben Ishak al-Warraq
andria (end 2nd cent.) has preserved fragments al-Nadim, Leipzig, 1862 ¢ James M. Robinson (ed.),
hailing from the Gnostic teacher > Basilides who The Nag Hammadi Library in English, third rev. ed.
interprets texts like Deut. 5:9 (punishment for Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1988 # Violet Macdermot (trans.),
sins striking several generations) and Rom. 7:10 Pistis Sophia (NHS IX), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1978 ¢
(‘I once lived without the Law’) as testimonies for Bentley Leyton (ed.), Nag Hammadi Codex II,2-7,
(NHS XXI), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1989 ¢ I. Gardner, The
reincarnation. We may also mention a hymn which
Kephalaia of the Teacher (NMHS 37), Leiden: E.J.
Hippolytus, a scholar and writer living at Rome Brill, 1995 # Michael Waldstein and Fredrik Wisse
in the beginning of the 3rd cent. has copied in his (eds), The Apocryphon ofJohn: Synopsis of Nag Ham-
Refutation (V, 10:2). This hymn says that the soul, madi Codices II,1;III,1; and IV,1 with BG 8502,2,
ruled by Law and by death, now and again suffers (NHMS XXXII), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1995.

--- Page 408 ---
REINCARNATION I 984
Lit.: H.S. Long, A Study of the Doctrine of Metempsy- his notion of reincarnation remained practically
chosis in Ancient Greece: From Pythaghoras to Plato, unknown. Isaac Luria (1534-1572) popularised the
Thesis Princeton, 1948 # A. des Georges, La réincar- Gilgul in the Kabbalah, thereby assimilating the
nation des ames selon les traditions orientales et occi-
Jewish experience of exile following the expulsion
dentales, Paris: Albin Michel, 1966 # Walter Burkert,
from Spain. Through reincarnation the scattered Lore and Science in Ancient Pythagoreanism, Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1972 ¢ Nancy tribes of Israel in the diaspora were supposed to
Demand, “Pindar’s Olympian 2, Theron’s Faith, and prepare the way for Tikkun, the messiasic res-
Empedocles’ Katharmoi”, in: Greek, Roman and titution of world history. + Guillaume Postel was
Byzantine Studies 16 (1975), 347-357 @ Friedrich the first identifiable theologian and philosopher
Solmsen, “Reincarnation in Ancient and Early Chris- in the 16th century to integrate metempsychosis
tian Thought”, in: Solmsen, Kleine Schriften II, 465-
into Christian theology, probably stimulated by
494, Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1982 ¢ Carl-A. Keller
(ed.), La réincarnation: Théories, raisonnements et kabbalistic authors. As in Bruno’s case, cosmology
appréciations, Bern: Peter Lang, 1986 Helmut Zan- provided the frame for an anthropology of reincar-
der, Geschichte der Seelenwanderung in Europa: Alter- nation in Postel. The significance of Christian kab-
native religidse Traditionen von der Antike bis heute, balists [> Jewish Influences III] for the discussion
Darmstadt: Primus Verlag, 1999. of reincarnation beliefs has only just begun to
attract scholarly attention.
CARL A. KELLER In the 17th century ideas of reincarnation gener-
ated a widespread debate in learned circles. For
Reincarnation II: Renaissance — present example, metempsychosis was an image of the path
of the soul towards its resemblance to God for
Traditional beliefs in reincarnation in Europe John Donne (1572-1631), but Cyrano de Bergerac
probably came to an end after the the fall of Rome. (1619-1655) saw it as an actual path to perfection.
At the end of the Middle Ages > Gemistos Plethon An important intermediary may have been > Fran-
(1355-1452) revived the idea of metempsychosis, ciscus Mercurius van Helmont, who, as a Christian
and the same idea had been developed independ- kabbalist, included especially Lurianic ideas in
ently by the > Cathars, possibly through their his work Two Hundred Queries ... Concerning
debate about Christian purgatory. Notions of rein- the Doctrine of the Revolution of Humane Souls
carnation in the Kabbalah (Book of Bahir, c. 1200) and Its Conformity to the Truths of Christianity
also appear to have emerged independently, (1684). He discussed his ideas of “revolution” with
although there was some limited contact between ~ Henry More and Anne Conway (1631-1679) or
Mediterranean Jewry and post-antiquity Gnostic with Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716), who
groups. There is no evidence for the transmission of again exchanged views on the subject with Elisa-
manichaean ideas often discussed in this context beth Charlotte of Orléans (1652-1722), the sister-
[> Manichaeism]. However, there has been a con- in-law of King Louis XIV of France. By the end of
tinuous debate in kabbalistic Judaism from the the 17th century there had developed in several
13th century up until the present regarding the Germanic languages a special idea of metempsy-
“Gilgul”. The end of reincarnation beliefs in antiq- chosis, beyond that of the ancient terms in use:
uity and their medieval thematicisation has hardly Seelenwanderung (transmigration of souls; Ger-
been investigated yet. man) or Zielsverhuizing (Dutch). This may mark
In the Renaissance the educated classes became the beginning of an independent discourse.
familiar with reincarnation beliefs as a result of These philosophical and anthropological issues
their engagement with Platonic and Neoplatonic in the early modern period characterised the de-
texts [~ Neoplatonism]. However, metempsy- bate about reincarnation in Europe over the en-
chosis was usually regarded as a marginal aspect suing centuries. The central question was whether
of philosophy or interpreted as an allegory (e.g. re- the monistic anthropology of Christianity, which
incarnation in animals as a metaphor for bestial recognised no disembodied soul, was compatible
behaviour in > Ficino). Nevertheless, a few Renais- with the dualistic human image of reincarnation
sance philosophers embraced ideas of reincarna- beliefs. Almost all theologians denied the possibil-
tion, but these can be traced no earlier than the ity of separating body and soul, and regarded the
second half of the 16th century (no prosopographic belief in the Resurrection as contradictory to the
survey to date). Most likely inspired by ancient notion of multiple incarnations. Van Helmont
philosophers, notably Pythagoras, ~ Giordano made a significant contribution to the debate with
Bruno conceived of metempsychosis as a comple- his term “revolution”, signifying a multiple resur-
ment to his conception of an infinite universe, but rection of the same body, whereby an incomplete

--- Page 409 ---
985 REINCARNATION II
life could be perfected in further stages without of souls. Analogical thinking provided important
the separation of body and soul. From a soterio- proof or at least plausible evidence. The Swiss
logical perspective, this construct probably offered naturalist Charles Bonnet (1720-1793) introduced
an alternative to the Calvinistic doctrine of predes- the idea of palingenesis (first published in 1769)
tination. The irreconcilability of Christian anthro- which Lessing transformed into the transmigration
pological assumptions with reincarnation beliefs of souls. Bonnet’s “stages”, which man ascends
severely restricted their spread up to the end of the upon a “ “chain” of planetary worlds, becomes for
r9th century. Lessing the transmigration of souls on earth. In
Eschatology played a further part in this parti- these debates rebirth had only a limited esoteric
cular history of Western ideas. The numerous meaning. Although all discussants were aware that
cosmologies of the 16th century jeopardised the it lay outside the mainstream of theological and
notion of a collective divine Judgment at the end philosophical tradition, it was openly discussed
of time. Individual justice and the salvation of in educated circles. Only at the end of the 18th
man after death received new formulations. This century did reincarnation become a secret tradi-
individualisation of eschatology in Christian theol- tion, especially in masonic circles.
ogy also became a central consideration in ideas Far into the rgth century, the idea of reincar-
about reincarnation. Likewise, reincarnation was nation was the exclusive preserve of an educated
supposed to guarantee the perfection of man, elite in a predominantly Protestant milieu. There is
whereby human autonomy was emphasised to no evidence whatsoever of it entering popular
the detriment of divine redemption. Furthermore, beliefs. Its eventual widespread popularisation is
reincarnation was linked from the end of the closely linked with the history of > spiritualism,
r7th century with the idea of the development of which movement split into factions which either
humankind and from the 18th century it became an accepted or rejected reincarnation following the
alternative religious belief qualifying the doctrine publication of > Allan Kardec’s Livre des Esprits
of evolution. An important example of this recep- (1857). In the second edition (1859), Kardec pre-
tion is Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (1729-1781), sented a catechism of more than 1000 questions
whose Erziehung des Menschengeschlechts (1780) and answers, with reincarnation serving as the
made Seelenwanderung an instrument of divine basis of a universal philosophy. Kardec regarded
instruction, leading human beings to perfection. himself as a Christian theologian: his coining
With this adjustment in the 17th and 18th cen- of the word “reincarnation” as an analogue of
turies, reincarnation ideas acquired their specific “incarnation”, may even identify him as its origi-
European coloration. No longer viewed as a nator. By the end of the 2oth century, the generic
penance, as in antiquity, in Giordano Bruno or term “reincarnation” had displaced all other
in Asian beliefs, reincarnation was now seen as synonyms (metempsychosis, rebirth, Seelenwan-
an opportunity, and this reinterpretation carried derung, transmigration, Wiederverkérperung) in
important implications for its human subject. Per- current usage.
fection was now the goal and not extinction, as The - Theosophical Society popularised its
with Buddha and Bruno. usage significantly. The founding generation,
The historical derivation of reincarnation beliefs among whom ~> Helena Petrovna Blavatsky and
ran a separate course from its philosophical sub- > Henry Steel Olcott played the major role, came
stantiation. Partly they were regarded as a compo- from the spiritualist camp and replaced its
nent of philosophia perennis, which > tradition, empiricism with an esoteric history of religion.
especially since the end of the 18th century (e.g. Reincarnation also became a component of the
in the high grades of the > Illuminaten) was occult history of mankind in this context. When
postulated in opposition to the mainstream. Its Blavatsky and Olcott moved to India in 1879,
revival through reference to ancient authors seems Blavatsky accepted reincarnation, most likely
to have been a rare occurrence, as in the case of through her contact with Buddhist ideas; in her ear-
Frans Hemsterhuis (1721-1790), but there is no lier work Isis Unveiled (1877), she had actually
further reference to Kabbalah except for Jewish rejected metempsychosis. Blavatsky asserted that
kabbalists in the 18th century. > Johann Wolfgang her idea of reincarnation derived from an ancient
von Goethe (1749-1832) offers an example of the secret wisdom of Tibetan origin. However, its focus
pragmatic use of reincarnation to deal with issues on the human subject and involvement with an
of contingency. Against a Spinozan background he evolutionary history indicates its provenance in
explained “incomprehensible” love affairs in his European thought. The significance of Theosophy
biography with reference to the transmigration for the spread of reincarnation ideas cannot be

--- Page 410 ---
REINCARNATION II 986
overestimated, as important promoters of esoteric psychology and as a significant economic factor in
thought such as > Rudolf Steiner also took their reincarnation beliefs.
idea of reincarnation from this source. Theosophy Reincarnation has not become a powerful social
also introduced the notion of karma to signify a force in European culture. One reason may be the
moral system for the consequences of one’s actions lack of social relevance. Collective and political
leading to a good or bad rebirth. At the end of the expressions of reincarnation beliefs, as in the
rg9th century, karma began to supersede the Chris- Hindu caste system or the Tulku genealogies of
tian ideas of judgment and retribution, thereby cre- Tibetan Buddhism, have not developed in Europe.
ating a certain distance from Christian terminology Attempts to relate reincarnation to society and
in theology and religious studies. Contemporary politics, like that of Charles Fourier (1768-1830) at
experiments to find empirical proof of reincarna- the beginning of the r9th century, remained still-
tion, which began in the rgth century in response born. There has also emerged a massive critique of
to scientific methodology, are the long-term results reincarnation in response to its growth since the
of spiritualist and Theosophical attempts to objec- early modern period. For example, there were in
tivize reincarnation. No empirical studies of rein- the 18th century many alternative theories of
carnation have as yet been discovered before the palingenesis or ideas of a “planetary round”, as in
end of the 18th century. Johann Gottfried Herder (1744-1803) or in >
After the turn of the last century reincarna- Pierre Simon Ballanche (1776-1847), which sought
tion became a widespread idea among the Euro- to link the idea of progress with mainstream Euro-
pean middle and upper classes. The astronomer pean traditions, without invoking reincarnation or
Camille Flammarion (1842-1925), the writer positing the separation of body and soul. Mean-
August Strindberg (1849-1912) or the founder of while, there are secular critiques of reincarnation.
the Ford motor empire Henry Ford (1863-1947) For instance, it has been banned in Germany if
are representative examples. Reincarnation was linked to a justification of Nazism and the state-
generally linked to ideas of progress and focused ment that the extermination of the Jews was their
on the individual. Only in exceptional cases was deserved karmic destiny. One and a half thousand
reincarnation marked by a more Buddhistic rela- years of Christianity in Europe have ultimately
tivisation of self-realisation, as for example in marginalised the idea of reincarnation. Even its
Arthur Schopenhauer (1788-1860) or his follower establishment as a minority world-view since the
Richard Wagner (1813-1883) or, at the beginning early modern period occurred within the context of
of the 20th century, among European Buddhists Christianity or its secular residues such as the
who read Oriental texts in the original languages or autonomy of the subject, the linear conception of
in reliable translations. history or the idea of evolution. This syncretism
In the zoth century, the number of societies prop- has produced a particular modern European form
agating reincarnation rocketed, among them the of reincarnation belief, which differs notably from
Anthroposophical Society [> Anthroposophy], its manifestations in antiquity and the Orient.
the Lectorium Rosicrucianum and > Scientology.
After the mid-zoth century there was also a mas- Lit.: Edouard Bertholet, La Réincarnation, Lausanne:
P. Genillard, 1978 [Sources], first published in 1949
sive diffusion of reincarnation ideas outside insti-
Daniel Cyranka, “Zwischen Neurophysiologie und
tutional associations, for example in the > New ‘Indischen Marchen’: Anmerkungen zu Schlossers
Age Movement and in the growing market for Gesprachen tber die Seelenwanderung”, in: Michael
esoteric literature. Statistical surveys suggest that Bergunder (ed.), Religidser Pluralismus und Christen-
some 10-30% of the population of Europe and tum: Festgabe fiir Helmut Obst zum 60. Geburtstag,
North America now believe in reincarnation. The Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2001 ¢ Wouter
J. Hanegraatt, New Age Religion and Western Culture:validity of such surveys is often uncertain, depend-
Esotericism in the Mirror of Secular Thought, Leiden:
ing on whether it is a question of actual belief in
E.J. Brill, etc. 1996/Albany: SUNY Press, 1998, 262-
reincarnation or whether it is only considered 275, 475-479 @ Lynn Kear, Reincarnation: A selected
probable or comforting. The numbers expressing annotated bibliography, Westport, London: Green-
agreement with reincarnation do appear to have wood, 1996 # Martin Mulsow, “Verniinftige Metem-
remained constant at this percentage. Today rein- psychosis: Uber Monadenlehre, Esoterik und geheime
carnation is not an isolated notion but linked to all Aufklarungsgesellschaften im 18. Jahrhundert”, in:
other kinds of world-view. The 20th century has Monika Neugebauer-Wolk (ed.), Aufklarung und Eso-
terik, Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1999, 211-273 Guil-
introduced only one innovation. Since the end of
laume Postel, Les admirables secrets des nombres
the 1950s, reincarnation therapy (e.g. past life platoniciens (ed. Jean-Pierre Brach), Paris: J. Vrin,
regression) has developed as a branch of esoteric 2zoor « Willi Temme, Krise der Leiblichkeit: Die

--- Page 411 ---
987 RETIF DE LA BRETONNE
Sozietat der Mutter Eva (Buttlarsche Rotte) und Paris), he was ruined by the collapse of the assignat
der radikale Pietismus um 1700, Gottingen: Vanden- currency and fell into poverty; but continued
hoeck & Ruprecht, 1998, 440-443 # Helmut Zander, writing and publishing stories, plays, and above all
Geschichte der Seelenwanderung in Europa: Alter-
his monumental autobiography, Monsieur Nicolas
native religidse Traditionen von der Antike bis
heute, Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft/ ou le Coeur humain dévoilé (Mr. Nicolas, or the
Primus-Verlag, 1999. Human Heart Revealed, 1797). Between 1798
and 1802, thanks to the patronage of Mme. de
HELMUT ZANDER Beauharnais, he obtained a position at the ministry
of police and finished several manuscripts, for the
Rétif (or Restif ) de la Bretonne, most part unpublished: L’Anti-Justine (The Anti-
Nicolas-Edme, * 23.10.1734 Sacy, Justine, 1798), Les Posthumes (The Posthumous
T 3.12.1806 Paris Letters, 1802), L’Enclos et les Oiseaux (The Enclo-
sure and the Birds), Les Mille et une métamor-
Born ina small village in Burgundy, Rétif, known phoses (The Thousand and One Metamorphoses),
as “de la Bretonne” (the name of his family farm), and Les Revies. In these last works, Rétif fully
was the son of a well-to-do peasant, whose ideal- regained his inspiration: he gave free rein to his
ized portrait he painted in La Vie de mon peére imagination and his fantasies, alternating between
(My Father’s Life, 1778). Raised by two Jansenist the erotic and the fantastic.
brothers, he received a very strict religious educa- After his death, he left behind an immense and
tion; however, he learned to read and write very varied body of work: more than forty titles and two
late, and remained self-taught all his life. At age hundred volumes. In these works, Rétif appears as
16, he was apprenticed to a printer at Auxerre, an admirer of Voltaire and a disciple of Rousseau,
then became a journeyman typographer at Dijon, committed to the Enlightenment and a partisan of
Auxerre, and Paris. Beginning in 1767, he fre- the Revolution. But one also notices in certain
quented the Bohemian literary underworld of Paris works, like the Philosophie de Monsieur Nicolas
and published several novels, such as La Famille (Philosophy of Mr. Nicolas, 1796) or Les Post-
vertueuse (The Virtuous Family, 1767) and Le Pied humes, a zone of darkness and mystery, a secret
de Fanchette (Fanchette’s Foot, 1769); also various philosophy, which might be explained by his affilia-
projects for reform, called Idées singuliéres (pecu- tion with > Freemasonry or by his adhesion to the
liar ideas), for example Le Pornographe (The doctrine of the [lluminés [> Illuminism]. Up to
Pornographer, 1769), La Mimographe (The Mimo- now, no lodge’s record attesting to Rétif’s member-
grapher, 1770) and Les Gynographes (The Gynog- ship in a masonic order has ever been found in the
raphers, 1777), in which he purported to reform archives; however, his life and works show indis-
prostitution, theater, and the education of women putable links to masonry.
respectively. In L’Andrographe (The Androgra- Rétif kept up close and steady connections
pher, 1782) and Le Thesmographe (The Thesmog- with numerous masons, mostly belonging to the
rapher, 1789), he appeared to be a precursor of Neuf Soeurs (Nine Sisters) Lodge, including Cail-
socialism and communism, while in the utopian hava, Cordier, Cubiéres, Fontanes, Francois de
novel La Découverte australe par un homme Neufchateau, Lalande, Lepelletier de Morfontaine,
volant (The Discovery of Austral Lands by a Fly- Lezay-Marnésia, Mercier, and Nougaret. The
ing Man, 1781) he showed himself a partisan of designs of Rétif’s reform projects, such as Le
evolution. Pornographe (1769) or L’Andrographe (1782), are
Rétif became famous in 1775 with the publi- based on the same model as the statutes of masonic
cation of Paysan perverti (Perverted Peasant), associations. The same fundamental principles are
an epistolary novel that became an immense suc- there: an insistence on secrecy, justification of work,
cess, as did the series of Contemporaines (Con- praise of equality and fraternity, and morals of rec-
temporaries), a collection of illustrated short iprocity and solidarity. There is no denying the
stories in 42 volumes. Near the end of the old authentic masonic values in Rétif’s works.
régime, between 1780 and 1789, Rétif de la Bre- In his writings, there is also a predilection for
tonne was a celebrated writer, a friend of Beau- coded language, in particular a frequent use of
marchais and Sébastien Mercier, sought out by the masonic vocabulary with terms such as: respect-
aristocrats and welcomed in the salons of Grimod able, venerable, illustrious, immortal, enlightened,
de la Reyniére and Fanny de Beauharnais. A fasci- fraternity, humanity, zeal, and regeneration. He
nated witness of the French Revolution, which he often reverses letters or syllables when tran-
described in Les Nuits de Paris (The Nights of scribing proper names, resulting in a profusion

--- Page 412 ---
RETIF DE LA BRETONNE 988
of pseudonyms and anagrams. He also assigns a + Willermoz, or > Saint-Martin, who sincerely
symbolic value to numbers: he readily uses the cal- wanted to regenerate Christianity.
endary divisions and displays an absolute mania Even more than Christianity, seen as a false reli-
for dates, anniversaries, and Latin inscriptions. gion and source of error and illusion, Rétif
Like the adepts of Freemasonry, Rétif showed a attacked the Catholic Church and its priests, whom
definite interest in ancient and Oriental religions. he presented as self-serving, deceitful, and hypo-
In Les Nuits de Paris (The Nights of Paris, 1788) critical. As for monks, they were even worse than
there are long discussions on the religion and priests: withdrawn from the world, they appeared
morality of the ancient Egyptians, as brought back as cynical and unscrupulous libertines.
into fashion by - Cagliostro’s Egyptian Masonry. With his radical criticism of the Christian reli-
Following the mystic traditions of Eleusis and gion, Rétif placed himself incontestably among
Osiris, Rétif wanted to reéstablish initiations for the partisans of the Enlightenment. He admired
men and for women. He alludes frequently to the Voltaire, Rousseau, and Buffon, and did not hesi-
Greek myths of Epimenides and the Phoenix, both tate to proclaim himself their disciple, even if he
symbols of immortality. He often praises Pythago- sometimes criticized them. He praised “enlight-
ras, admiring his theory of sacred number [> Num- ened” statesmen such as Frederick the Great,
ber Symbolism] and his belief in metempsychosis Joseph II, and Benjamin Franklin. Like Rousseau
[> Reincarnation|. Nor was Rétif indifferent to the and Helvetius, he believed in progress through
craze for Oriental religions. He often refers to Per- education. His various projects of reform likewise
sian, Hindu, Chinese, and Tibetan religions, believ- showed his belief in the possibility of improving
ing that his own ideas are to be found there, and he morals and society: thus we see him applauding
sometimes even quotes the Kabbalah [> Jewish the French Revolution, which would nevertheless
Influences]. ruin him. Finally, he never showed hostility
On the other hand, in reaction against the aus- towards the science of his time, and was aware of
tere Jansenism of his youth, Rétif manifested viru- the most recent discoveries of Lavoisier, Lamettrie,
lent anti-Christian and anti-clerical sentiments. He and Laplace.
did not believe in the personal God of the Chris- In response to Mallet of Geneva in 1786, Rétif
tians, nor in Providence, but in an eternal God, the denied being a disciple of Swedenborg, Cagliostro,
principle of Being, the Great Architect of the Uni- +> Martinism, or > Cazotte. Nevertheless, he cor-
verse, who is one with the All or Nature. For Rétif, responded with many celebrated Illuminés, some
God cannot be good and generous, but only just. of whom were also his friends: Nicolas de Bon-
God is synonymous with Nature and with the neville, founder of the Cercle Social, admirer of
Order of the world; there is no Devil, no Hell, no Swedenborg and Saint-Martin, who would later
Paradise, and the immortality of the soul is a mere edit the Philosophie de Monsieur Nicolas; Jacques
fantasy. Cazotte, the famous author of Le Diable amoureux
Rétif objected equally to the existence of beings (The Amorous Devil) and an adept of the > Elus
intermediary between God and: man, such as Coéns and of Saint-Martin, to whom Rétif ascribed
angels, sylphs, or genies — invisible beings with the inspiration for Les Posthumes; the famous
whom man could nonetheless communicate. Such Cagliostro, whom Rétif sometimes called a “great
beings do occasionally appear in his utopian or man” and sometimes a “charlatan”, and who was
fantastic novels, but he criticizes them unambigu- the model for Multipliandre, the hero of Les
ously in his didactic works, thus making clear Posthumes; and lastly, the Baron de Corberon,
that he wished not to be identified with Illuminés minister to the Prince des Deux-Ponts, disciple of
like + Swedenborg or Dupont de Nemours. Swedenborg, devotee of occult sciences and eso-
Rétif denied the divinity of Jesus Christ, whom tericism, who declared himself an admirer of Rétif
he most often calls Jesuah, and sometimes goes so and met him in 1784.
far as to deny his existence altogether. He denied Rétif figures in > Gérard de Nerval’s Les IIlu-
the virginity of Mary, the miracles, and the Resur- minés, together with Cazotte, Cagliostro, and
rection, and considered Christ to have been merely Quintus Auclerc. Nerval’s notoriety and the suc-
a philanthropist and a benefactor of mankind. In cess of the book, published in 1852 and often
opposition to the church of his time, he praised the reprinted, contributed largely to Rétif’s reputation
merits of the primitive church, in which poverty, as one of the representatives of 18th-century IIlu-
equality, and fraternity reigned. But this was a minism. Rétif’s thought has, indeed, many affinities
polemical device, and one should not confuse with the doctrine of the Illuminés. Even if he
Rétif with mystical Illuminés such as Swedenborg, claimed to be a partisan of the Enlightenment, the

--- Page 413 ---
989 RETIF DE LA BRETONNE
author of the Philosophie de Monsieur Nicolas living beings, stars, humans, and animals, united in
often distanced himself from science: he claimed an immense chain of beings, in which one can dis-
to reconcile reason and analogy, observation and tinguish an overall gradation from animal to
imagination. He reproached the savants for being man, from man to the universe. Like Diderot in Le
mere calculators and “chiffromanes” (number- Réve de d’Alembert, in La Découverte australe
maniacs), incapable of making unexpected connec- (1781) Rétif adopted the evolutionist hypothesis
tions or wide-ranging hypotheses. and the theory of the transformation of species.
Rétif never hesitated to extrapolate boldly, start- One also finds there a sort of pansexualism:
ing with simple analogies. He based himself on a all of Rétif’s universe is sexualized. As the primi-
unique principle: everything in nature is image and tive androgyne, God is simultaneously male and
symbol, so that analogy and comparison are the female, fertilizing and regenerating him/herself.
best means for grasping the hidden meaning of the Created by God, the universe consists of a multi-
universe. In this sense, Rétif can be considered an tude of male suns and female planets, reproducing
authentic representative of esoteric thought. For themselves in an immense copulation. This uni-
him, as for most of the Illuminés, there is a pro- verse is the only thing deserving of a religion: man’s
found correspondence between man and nature, adoration should be addressed to Father Sun and
between the microcosm and the macrocosm, and Mother Earth, the male and female principles that
their secret relationships can only be revealed govern our world. This worship of heavenly bodies
through symbols and allegories. recalls primitive animism and ancient Sabaeism:
Rétif’s thought is fundamentally analogical and hence Rétif has been labeled a neopagan [> Neo-
symbolic, but even in his most extravagant infer- paganism] and restorer of the pagan cults.
ences it does not cease to be logical and rational. His Rétif went further: he invented a whole original
logic is eminently dialectic: it is built upon a favorite cosmology, which describes the entirety of the uni-
principle of the Hermetists, that of the opposition verse in mutation, beginning with the explosion of
and unity of contraries. Good and Evil oppose and suns that transform into comets, then into planets,
complement each other, like Life and Death, Light under the effect of gravitation and later of crystal-
and Darkness, Sun and Earth, and the Male and lization. But for Rétif the universe does not die;
Female principles. Here we find the Manichaean it only regenerates and renews itself through a
opposition [> Manichaeism] of Ormuzd and Ahri- whole series of revolutions and mutations. This
man in Persian religion, of Yin and Yang in Chinese concept of the Eternal Return sometimes leads him
philosophy, and also of the two columns Jachin and to envisage metempsychosis, even though he did
Boaz in masonic symbolism. not believe in the soul’s immortality or the perma-
Rétif’s philosophy can be defined as a pantheistic nent identity of the individual ego. For him, only
materialism, or rather as a materialistic pantheism. the Whole is immortal; the parts simply aggregate
From Le Généographe (The Geneographer, 1770) and separate themselves into new individuals, who
to the last “juvénale” (Satire, after Juvenal) entitled retain no memory of their past existence in the
“Immoralité folle des athées” (Insane Immorality form of dispersed elements.
of the Atheists, 1797), Rétif never ceased to criti- Rétif wanted to create a new religion. He
cize the atheism of the Baron d’Holbach, Diderot, invented an original philosophical system and
and Lalande. However, he very soon accepted the a coherent system of physics, in the form of a
principles of the most radical materialism: the idea vast cosmogony. But this concept was not free
that all the universe is nothing but matter in from contradictions. Rétif seems divided between
motion, and that matter is capable of thought. His rationalism and Illuminism, between rational
philosophy was inspired directly by Spinoza, for thought and symbolic thought, just like many of his
whom thought and extension are only methods of contemporaries, during the time when science was
a common substance, i.e. God or Nature. In this just beginning to disengage itself from the occult
sense, Rétif was favorable to monism, to the unity sciences and follow rigorous, methodical rules.
of thought and matter, and was opposed to Carte- According to Bachelard’s theories, Rétif’s thought
sian dualism. is the epitome of pre-scientific thought, which
This materialism and pantheism is at the same refuses to make the necessary split between image
time a type of vitalism, because God or the Princi- and concept, and above all fails to verify hypothe-
ple of Being is synonymous with life. God consists ses through experimentation. Be that as it may,
of a vital or intellectual fluid, a sort of electro- Rétif’s literary merit lies in his discernment, well
magnetic fluid that animates inert matter and before the Romantics [~ Romanticism] and the
gives it its form. It corresponds to the sum total of Surrealists, of all the poetic riches of Illuminism

--- Page 414 ---
RETIF DE LA BRETONNE 99°
that liberate the forces of the unconscious and the influence of the school of > Marcilio Ficino, dom-
imagination. inated by the Platonic tradition in a particular spir-
itualistic interpretation, and to the > Hermetic
Oeuvres completes (1767-1889), Geneva, Paris: Slat- literature which had been translated into Latin by
kine Reprints, 1988 (207 vols.) # Rétif de la Bretonne, Ficino. These interests culminated in the publica-
Monsieur Nicolas (ed. P. Testud), Paris: Bibliothéque tion of Reuchlin’s first work on the kabbalah, De
de la Pléiade, Gallimard, 1989, 2 vols. # Le Généo- verbo mirifico (1494): the result of his association
graphe (ed. D. Fletcher), Studies on Voltaire 170
with > Pico della Mirandola, the originator of
(1977), 125-234 Les Revies, critical ed. by P. Bour-
Christian kabbalah. Reuchlin had become aware
guet, Poitiers, 2002, 2 vols.
of the wider horizons of late-1 5th century knowl-
Lit.: P. Bourguet, “Rétif et la franc-magonnerie”, edge and science, and he adopted the graecized
Etudes rétiviennes 34 (2002), 247-272 ¢ D. Coward, name Capnion. When returning to Germany he
The Philosophy of Restif de la Bretonne, Oxford: The became a counselor to Count Eberhard of Wirt-
Voltaire Foundation, 1991 @ M. Delon, “Savoir totali- temburg, and continued his studies of Hebrew.
sant et forme éclatée”, Dix-huitieéme siecle 14 (1982),
Reuchlin’s assimilation of Platonism and Heb-
13-26 @ L. Loty, “Evolution culturelle, évolution poli-
tique, et révolutions rétiviennes”, Etudes retiviennes 2 rew occured at a time when the atmosphere in
(1986), 3-18 @ G. de Nerval, Les Illuminés, Paris: Vic- Europe was turning into directions diametrically
tor Lecou, 1852; ed. M. Milner in Oeuvres completes, opposite to his own inclinations. Enmity towards
Bibliothéque de la Pléiade, Paris: Gallimard, 1986, the Jews, expressed by their persecution in Spain
vol. 2, 946-1074 ¢ P. Testud, Rétif de la Bretonne et (culminating in the expulsion of the Jews from that
la création littéraire, Geneva, Paris: Droz, 1977 ¢
country in 1492) and the anti-Judaizing campaign
H. Tuzet, “Deux types de cosmogonies vitalistes: r.
of the Spanish Inquisition, was paralleled on the Restif de la Bretonne”, Revue des sciences humaines
(1960), 496-506; reprinted in: Le Cosmos et l’imagi- religious-intellectual level by hatred of the Talmud
nation, Paris: J. Corti, 1965, 344-357 @ A. Viatte, and deep suspicion of all Jewish traditions. The
Les Sources occultes du Romantisme: Illuminisme - increasingly dualistic world-view of the period
Théosophie, 1770-1820, Paris: Champion, 1928, (promoted intensively by the Dominicans), which
vol. I, 251-262. saw the earth as the battleground between Satan
and his servants and the Church, placed the Jews
PIERRE BOURGUET and their traditions on the Satanic side. The impact
of these views was stronger in Germany than in
Reuchlin, Johannes, * 22.2.1455 most other European countries, and the Florentine
Pforzheim, + 1522 Liebenzell school of humanism developed a perspective in
clear opposition to the prevailing cultural currents.
Reuchlin was the leading German humanist of The distance between Reuchlin and the human-
the Renaissance, the most prominent Hebraist of ists who followed him, on the one hand, and some
his age and the author of the central text of Christ- of the Church authorities in Germany, on the other,
ian kabbalah, De arte cabalistica (1517). The became apparent in the controversy concerning the
influence of his numerous books and the intense confiscation and burning of Jewish books which
controversy which surrounded them make him a erupted about 1508 and was to accompany Reuch-
key figure in the history of European spirituality in lin throughout his life. His most fierce opponent
the 16th century and the main influence on the was Johannes Pfefferkorn, who had been born as a
integration of Jewish and kabbalistic elements into Jew in Nuremberg in 1469, converted to Chris-
European thought [> Jewish Influences] and espe- tianity together with his family in Cologne in 1505,
cially European esotericism between the late-15th and became Germany’s most energetic and prolific
century and the r8th. writer against the Jews and their books. He claimed
Reuchlin’s early studies and scholarship were that Jews derived their spiritual power from their
focused on the Greek and classical languages and books, especially the Talmud, and subscribed to the
traditions. He studied in Freiburg, Paris and Basle. popular notion that the Talmud preaches against
He also obtained a degree in law in Poitiers (1481), Christianity (although he denied the Blood Libel).
taught classics, and wrote a Latin lexicon. In 1482 In order to stimulate their conversion, the books
he travelled to Italy for the first time, and became must be taken from the Jews, and several other
acquainted with the great humanistic center and social and religious restrictions should be enacted
library under the patronage of the Medicis in Flo- against them. With the help of the Dominicans in
rence. Here he added Hebrew to his intellectual Cologne, and especially the Dominican inquisitor
and linguistic interests, and was exposed to the Jacob Hochstraten, he succeeded to get attention

--- Page 415 ---
991 REUCHLIN
in the court of the Emperor Maximilian I. His the real meaning of the tetragrammaton is not to be
chief opponent was Reuchlin, and a controversy found in the Jewish four-letter version but in the
ensued which is documented by treatises from secret, five-letter one, which is the Christian secret
both sides. Pfefferkorn attacked Reuchlin in his name of Jesus, YHSWH. Jewish tradition is thus
Handspiegel (Mainz, 1511) and other books, and placed on a level which supplies important materi-
Reuchlin responed with his famous Augenspiegel als, yet the ultimate truth, which is of an esoteric-
(1512). The notorious anti-Dominican satirical Christian nature, eludes it. In De arte cabalistica,
work Epistolae obscurorum virorum (Dunkelmin- the speakers in the three dialogues are the Muslim
nerbriefe; 1515) was published anonymously, but Marranus, the philosopher Philolaus, and the Jew
probably written by several humanists inspired by Simon. Simon participates only in the first and
Reuchlin. In 1513, Hochstaten initiated an official third dialogues; he is absent from the second,
procedure against Reuchlin, which was rejected because it is conducted on Saturday, and the par-
in 1516 but re-enacted in 1520. The controversy ticipants — like the author — respect his religious
became a concern of intellectuals and leaders obligations on the Sabbath. Simon to a very large
in Germany, and even the Emperor and the Pope extent has “the final word”, and most of the third
became deeply involved in it. When studying and concluding dialogue is devoted to kabbalistic
Reuchlin’s works and theological positions, one information revealed by him. He is described as a
should always be conscious of the atmosphere of descendent of the revered Rabbi Simon bar Yohai,
accusations, persecutions and religious strife which the legendary author of the Zohar; and thus he is
accompanied his scholarly work; and there is little the physical embodiment of the kabbalah in gen-
doubt that, among the contemporary public, eral. It is very difficult to find any parallel to such a
Reuchlin’s views were shared by only a small sympathetic and generous presentation of a con-
minority. The intensification of the hatred towards temporary Jew in Christian literature; and in 1517,
the Jews following Luther’s attacks and the to publish one was higly unusual and courageous.
Catholic reaction made Reuchlin’s position into an There is no attempt to convert Simon or make him
isolated one. see the meaningfulness of Christian tradition, and
There is no inherent connection between Reuch- he emerges from the dialogues and the book as a
lin’s endeavors as a Hebraist and his theological devoted Jew. It is easy to understand why such a
writings in the field of the kabbalah. His grammar portrayal of a Jew infuriated some of his contem-
and lexicon of the Hebrew language, De Rudimen- poraries, among them Jewish converts to Chris-
tis Hebraicis published in 1506, has a similar place tianity, even though the attacks on Reuchlin in
in the history of Hebraism as De arte cabalistica fact started long before De arte cabalistica was
(1517) has in the history of the Christian kabbalah. published. As demonstrated by the comparison
Reuchlin’s philosophical work concerning the between his earlier and later work, these attacks
Hebrew language followed his previous writings in did not inhibit Reuchlin from further developing
Greek and his translations of classical Greek texts. his atttitude towards Jews and their secret lore.
All his work reflects the Renaissance humanist De verbo mirifico was the first book in Latin
drive of widening the horizons of languages and dedicated to the kabbalah in Jewish esoteric tradi-
classical lore, and seeking a new understanding by tions. De arte cabalistica is the work which demon-
excelling in the mastery of the ancient languages. strates Reuchlin’s mastery of the Hebrew language
The study of the Hebrew language did not carry and Jewish world-views, unparalleled both before
theological implications, as did the adherence and for a long time after its publication. Reuchlin
to the ideas of the kabbalah, and it was not a seems to enjoy quoting biblical verses in the origi-
significant part of the controversy which erupted nal, and many talmudic and kabbalistic para-
around Reuchlin in the last decades of his life. graphs are quoted in Hebrew as well as in Latin
A comparison between the structures of De translation. The presentation of a Christian theo-
verbo mirifico and De arte cabalistica is most logical work in which Hebrew characters embellish
instructive concerning the evolution of Reuchlin’s almost every page was an unusual event. It gave the
attitude towards the kabbalah, Judaism and the work an aura of erudition and reliance on primary,
Jews. Both works are presented as dialogues be- ancient and revered sources, which enhanced its
tween three participants. In the earlier work, the impact and influence.
speaker, Capnion, is in dialogue with the Epicurean As a disciple of Pico, it is not Reuchlin’s purpose
philosopher Sidonius and the Jew Baruchias. Cap- to present a coherent, systematic theology. He
nion (i.e., Reuchlin), is the ultimate authority who, quotes Pico’s statement that what is incoherent
to some extent, proves to the Jew Baruchias that is closer to the truth than what is coherent, as

--- Page 416 ---
REUCHLIN 992
Reuchlin presents it in De arte cabalistica book III the messianic age. In Reuchlin’s formulation, the
(Goodman ed., 269-271). In De verbo mirifico, the five-letter redeeming name is associated with the
main message is the basic identity of all religious appearance of Christianity, and thus does not sig-
systems, which, in their roots, are united in one nify a change in contemporary history. As a whole,
secret, sublime truth; that truth, according to Reuchlin’s work, like those of many humanists of
Reuchlin, is the supreme, esoteric truth of Chris- the time, did not include expectations of revolu-
tianity. That truth is revealed best by esoteric lore, tionary transformations in history and in political
and Reuchlin refers in particular to the traditions and religious institutions.
of Orpheus and, first and foremost, the teachings of For a reader of his theological works it is not
Pythagoras. In the second part of De arte cabalis- surprising that Reuchlin, declining all entreaties of
tica — the dialogue from which Simon is absent — his closest friends and colleagues, refused to join
the two debaters present Simon’s teachings on the the Protestant rebellion. He was never a person to
first day as identical to those of Pythagoras. The insist on differences and argue against the mistakes
core of the wisdom which Reuchlin purports to and errors of others (except those who attacked
glean from the kabbalah, from Pythagoras and all him, and even this he did with satirical elegance
other sources, is neoplatonic in nature. It is not and camouflage), and the developing schism and
Reuchlin’s way to make fine distinctions and pres- civil war in the Church distressed him. Some
ent differences; his method is an inclusive one, r9th-century scholars have described Reuchlin as
demonstrating the essential identity of the teach- ‘the father of the German Reformation’, but it is
ings which are presented in various languages and very doubtful whether such a title is correct and
terminologies. There should, however, be no mis- meaningful. Like most humanists, he cherished
take: when all the particular characteristics of ideas concerning reform and improvement in the
every ancient lore are removed, the remaining Church, but it is doubtful whether his world-
essence is that of Christian truth. view allowed or substantiated a revolutionary
One of the few connections which Reuchlin upheaval. His contacts with Popes, especially Leo
established between kabbalistic speculation and X, the younger brother of his patron Lorenzo de
contemporary Christian historical thought was his Medici (“the magnificent”) of Florence, demon-
formulation of the concept of stages in the history strate that he sought protection under the Vatican’s
of the spirit as a development of the Hebrew names wings; and he did not hesitate to dedicate his
of God. According to talmudic tradition, employed magnum opus on the kabbalah to the Pope, pref-
by Reuchlin, God revealed himself to the patriarchs aced by a long letter of praise to the Medici family
by the name of Shadday: SDY in Hebrew, a three- and its humanistic enterprise. Leo X, however,
letter name. To Moses and the people of Israel on did denounce Reuchlin in 1520 (together with
Mount Sinai, when the Torah was given, he was Martin Luther, incidentally). Nevertheless, there is
revealed by the tetragrammaton: YHVH, four no doubt that Reuchlin did not share the anti-
letters. The redemption is signified by the appear- Catholic sentiments of the leaders of the German
ance of the messiah, whose name consists of five Reformation.
letters, and becomes apparent by inserting a shin No less than his impact on the Christian kab-
into the tetragrammaton: YHVSH, which Reuchlin balah, Reuchlin’s influence on the development of
believed to be the five-letter original Hebrew name Hebraism in Christian Europe is second to none.
of Jesus. There is actually no kabbalistic element in Gershom Scholem has rightly described him as the
this construction; it follows the ancient Jewish and first great Christian scholar of Hebrew. He started
Christian division of history into ages, expressing it studying and publishing works concerning Hebrew
by the nature and structure of the dominant name grammar and lexicography in his youth, and con-
of God in that epoch. In Reuchlin’s rendering, there tinued this activity until his death.
is also no distinct eschatological meaning to the Reuchlin’s relationship with > gnosticism must
gradual, three-epoch historical unfolding of revela- be described mainly in negative terms, but many of
tion. His concepts have been compared with those the sources he used — including the kabbalah — do
of the great 13th-century historian of the revelation contain elements associated with gnosticism. The
of the Trinity, Joachim of Fiore; yet in the system reverence he demonstrated for the Zohar could
presented by Joachim, the third and last phase of have resulted in the development of gnostic motifs,
development, the appearance of the testamentum but they did not. Reuchlin rejected both Jewish and
aeternum of the Holy Spirit (following those of the Christian tendencies towards theological dualism,
Old Testament of the Father and the New Testa- and the concept of creation by an evil demiurge
ment of the Son) will anounce the beginning of could not be integrated in any way in his world-

--- Page 417 ---
993 RIJCKENBORGH
view. Like Ficino’s and Pico’s, his attitude towards Rijckenborgh, Jan van
the world was essentially an optimistic one. Like (ps. of Jan Leene), * 16.10.1896
his fellow-humanists, he was overwhelmed by the Haarlem (The Netherlands),
discovery of the great secrets of the universe
tT 17.7.1968 Santpoort
encoded in the old texts, and his main concern was
(The Netherlands)
the demonstration of the underlying unity which
bound them together. The revelation that Pythago-
Jan Leene who, under the pen name of Jan van
ras and the Zohar, > Hermes Trismegistus and the
Rijckenborg, became the founder of the Rosicru-
Egyptian hieroglyphs, were presenting the same
cian movement Lectorium Rosicrucianum, or the
message, identical to that of ancient, pure Chris-
International School of the Golden Rosy Cross,
tianity, was the dominating element in his work.
was born in Haarlem (The Netherlands) on Octo-
ber 16, 1896. His father was a textile merchant,
Johannes Reuchlin, Samtliche Werke (Widu-Wolfgang
and Jan became his successor when he finished
Ehlers, Hans-Gert Roloff & Peter Schafer, eds.),
his High School studies. Although the Leenes
Stuttgart-Bad Cannstadt: Fromann-Holzboog, 1996
¢ On the Art of the Kabbalah/De arte cabalistica were a strict Dutch Reformed family, Jan became
(Martin & Sarah Goodman, trans.), Lincoln & interested in religions other than Christianity
London: University of Nebraska Press, 1983. from his early years. He also read Christian eso-
teric authors, particularly > Jacob Boehme (1575-
Lit.: Joseph Dan, “The Kabbalah of Johannes Reuch- 1624); and he would later translate Boehme’s
lin and its Historical Significance”, in: Joseph Dan masterpiece Aurora.
(ed.), The Christian Kabbalah: Jewish Mystical Books
He was also interested in 17th century > Rosi-
and their Christian Interpreters, Cambridge, Mass:
crucianism, and originally thought its legitimate
Harvard Univerity Press, 1997, 55-96 # Giulio Busi &
Severio Campanini, Johannes Reuchlin: L’arte Cabba- modern heir was the Rosicrucian Fellowship
listica, Firenze: Opus Libri, 1995 (including a most established in the United States by > Max Heindel
detailed bibliography, 227-270) ¢ L. Geiger, Johann (pseud. of Carl Luis von Grasshoff, 1865-1919).
Reuchlin: Sein Leben und seine Werke, Leipzig: Van Rijckenborgh eventually became the leader
Duncher & Humboldt, 1871, repr. Nieuwkoop: B. de of the Rosicrucian Fellowship in the Netherlands,
Graaf, 1964 ¢ H.A. Oberman, “Johannes Reuchlin:
and was joined by his brother Zwier Wilhelm
Von Judenknechten zu Judenrechten”, in: A. Herzig
Leene (1892-1938). From August 1924, an “inner
& J.H. Schoeps (eds.), Reuchlin und die Juden,
Sigmaringen: Thornbecke, 1993, 39-64 ¢ Gershom pilgrimage” persuaded van Rijckenborgh that
Scholem, “Die Erforschung der Kabbala von Reuchlin Gnosis as truth lay at the heart of all religions and
bis zur Gegenwart”, in: Judaica III: Studien zur judis- indeed all human beings, and he oriented the
chen Mystik, Frankfurt a/M: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1973, Dutch Chapter of the Rosicrucian Fellowship
247-263 @ Stefan Rhein, Reuchlin und die politischen towards a Gnostic vision of Rosicrucianism. In
Krafte seiner Zeit, Sigmaingen: J. Thorbecke, 1998 ¢
1935, together with his brother and Ms. Henny
Josef Benzing, Bibliographie der Schriften Johannes
Stok-Huyser (1902-1990), later to be known Reuchlins im 15. und 16. Jahrhundert, Bad Bocklet: W.
Krief, 1955 # Guido Kisch, Zasius und Reuchlin: Eine under her pen name of Catharose de Petri, van
rechtsgeschichtlich-vergleichende Studie zum Toleranz- Rijckenborgh left the Fellowship in order to
problem im 16. Jahrhundret, Konstanz: I. Thorbecke, establish a Rosicrucian Society of their own. Van
1961 @ Charles Zika, Reuchlin und die okkulte Tradi- Rijckenborgh accused the Fellowship of delving
tion der Renaissance, Sigmaringen: J. Thorbecke, 1998 into occult practices, and based the teachings of
¢ Max Brod, Johannes Reuchlin und sein Kampf:
the new Rosicrucian Society on ~ Gnosticism
Eine historische Monographie, Stuttgart: Kohlham-
and Christian esotericism. He had a particular
mer, 1965 @ Hans Peterse, Jacobus Hoogstraeten gegen
Johannes Reuchlin: Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte des interest in re-interpreting the Gospel history of
Antijudaismus im 16. Jahrhundred, Mainz: Zabern, early Christianity as the development of an initia-
1995- tion process. The initiate, van Rijckenborgh
taught, should evolve from John (the seeker) to
JOSEPH DAN Jesus (the twice born) to the Christ (the trans-
figured human being).
For the journal New Religious Orientation,
Ricenus Thrasibulus ~ Khunrath,
van Rijckenborgh translated several 17th-century
Heinrich Rosicrucian documents. Besides this quite schol-
arly activity, he also gathered followers around
Richter, Samuel > Sincerus Renatus him, who were attracted not only by his teachings

--- Page 418 ---
RIJCKENBORGH 994
but also by his abilities as a seer. He warned against rozenkruis, Haarlem: Rozekruis Pers, 19844 # Dez
the dangers of contacts with the spirit world, and Gloria Intacta, Haarlem: Rozekruis Pers, 19955 # Het
Mysterie der Zaligsprekingen, Haarlem: Rozekruis
condemned spiritualist and occult practices of all
Pers, 1999.
kind. During World War II, van Rijckenborgh’s
Society was banned by the occupying Nazis, and
Lit.: Konrad Dietzfelbinger, Die Geistesschule des
had to continue its activities underground. Van
Goldenen Rosenkreuzes: Eine spirituelle Gemein-
Rijckenborgh proceeded with his work as a
schaft der Gegenwart, Andechs: Dingfelder Verlag,
translator, however, working on the Corpus 1999 ¢ Harald Lamprecht, Neue Rosenkreuzer: Ein
Hermeticum and several Manichaean texts [> Handbuch, Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht,
Manichaeism]. 2004, 250-296.
In 1945, the Rosicrucian Society was reorgan-
ized under its present name, Lectorium Rosicru- MASSIMO INTROVIGNE
cianum, or the International School of the Golden
Rosy Cross. In 1946, van Rijckenborgh published
Risenus Thrasibulus > Khunrath,his main work, Dei Gloria Intacta. In that same
year, he travelled to Southern France, where he Heinrich
studied the historical and archaeological records of
ancient > Catharism. It was there, in 1948, that he Ritter, Johann Wilhelm, *16.12.1776
met Antonin Gadal (1871-1962), a key figure of Samitz (Silesia, now in Poland),
modern > neo-Catharism. Gadal recognized van
t 23.1.1810 Munich
Rijckenborgh as “Grand Master” of a mysterious
Gnostic Brotherhood, and remained a loyal mem- After studying pharmacology and chemistry in
ber of the Lectorium right up to his death. Liegnitz from 1791 to 1796, Ritter enrolled at the
Catharism was to remain an important intellectual University of Iena where he presented in 1797 a
reference for van Rijckenborgh during his whole ‘Demonstration that in the animal kingdom a con-
lifetime. stant galvanism accompanies the process of life’.
In fact, van Rijckenborgh’s doctrine affirms the This paper’s publication the following year stirred
existence of a universal Gnosticism, but takes into a flurry of debate. After its publication, Ritter occu-
account as its principal forms Christian Gnosticism pied two more or less overlapping positions within
and Catharism; the human being is interpreted as Germany’s intellectual world at the turn of the cen-
a microcosm, with a divine original spark (the
tury, namely, that of a Naturphilosoph |> Natur-
“rose”) capable of leading to renewal. The ego, philosophie] with strong theosophical leanings
however, creates a number of obstacles to the
and that of a great scientist. As a Naturphilosoph,
renewal process, and the initiate should endeavour
in 1799 he became one of ~ Novalis’s best
to free himself from them by connecting the divine
friends, then won the friendship and admiration of
spark of the heart to the “sanctuary” located in the
Johann Gottfried Herder. Friedrich Schlegel held
head. Van Rijckenborgh referred to this “alchemi-
him in great esteem, as did > Goethe, with whom
cal” and spiritual process as “transfiguration” and
he conducted some experiments in physics. In
it is, in fact, both an awakening and a return
1805 Ritter settled in Munich to teach and
“home” to the Kingdom of Heaven. On the other
do research. There, he collaborated with other
hand, his teachings strongly reject all occult tech-
Naturphilosophen, among whom > Friedrich W.]J.
niques, contacts with “ascended masters”, and
Schelling (appointed at the University of that city
spiritualist practices [~ Spiritualism]. Van Rijcken-
the year after), > Franz von Baader, who also held
borgh’s “auto-Freemasonry” is a personal spiritual
a Chair, and > Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert.
process, leading the initiate, at the same time, into
Thus emerged the “Schelling-Baader-Ritter tri-
an active and fruitful life.
umvirate” — as a contemporary ironically named
When he died in 1968, van Rijckenborgh had
it -, which played a central role in the history of
written more than forty books, and several other
the so-called “German romantic constellation” in
writings remain unpublished. In total, van Rijcken-
Munich. In 1806, at the Academy of Sciences in
borgh left to the Lectorium Rosicrucianum more
Munich (to which he had been elected a member
than 30.000 pages of teachings, which still form
in 1804 with the support of Baader), Ritter gave
the basis of the esoteric and religious instruction of
a lecture titled ‘On Physics considered as an
some 15.000 members world-wide.
Art’, which ranges among the most characteristic,
De Universele Gnosis, Haarlem: Rozekruis Pers, theosophically tinged texts produced by German
19923 @ Elementaire wijsbegeerte van het moderne Naturphilosophie. At the end of his life he pub-

--- Page 419 ---
995 RITTER
lished what was to remain his best known work, intellectual world and these important scientific
Fragmente aus dem Nachlasse eines jungen Physik- achievements, Ritter sadly remained poor all his
ers: Ein Taschenbuch fiir Freunde der Natur (Frag- life. He could hardly support his family (his wife
ments from the Legacy of a Young Physicist: A Dorothea Munchgesang and their four children).
Handbook for the Friends of Nature). This compi- Some people (among whom his friend and pub-
lation of his personal thoughts and reflections, lisher Carl Friedrich Ernst Frommann) helped him
jotted down over the preceding years, is presented financially, but this was hardly enough. Two rea-
as a sum of numbered aphorisms, apothegms, sons seem to account for this situation. First, he
and short developments dealing with chemistry, spent most of his money in procuring expensive sci-
physics, astronomy, biology, psychology, and —> entific instruments, and in Munich he ruined his
music, pervaded throughout by perspectives of an health by experiments of electrophysiology (elec-
esoteric character. They are preceded by a “roman- trical excitation of muscles and sensory organs)
ticized” autobiography. with high voltages, not only on plants and animals,
Many of the experiments Ritter made as a scien- but upon himself as well. Second, his difficult,
tist were concerned with electricity and/or electro- rough and chaotic style (more in the order of
chemistry. One of his earliest studies focused upon poetry) irritated many scientists and deterred them
the manner in which muscle tissue reacts to elec- from properly understanding the oral and pub-
trical charges, a research which helped him to lished accounts he gave of his investigations and
develop his theories in the context of Natur- discoveries. Moreover, the esoteric part of his inter-
philosophie. As a result of these studies, he was the ests aroused their suspicion. Significantly, Ritter
first to establish an explicit connection between had more readers among poetically and philosoph-
galvanism and chemical reactivity (1798-1801). ically oriented Naturphilosophen than among pro-
Beginning in 1799 and throughout the rest of fessional scientists (with some exceptions, such as
his life he contributed articles to several acade- the celebrated chemist Hans Christian Oersted,
mic journals, including Allgemeines Journal der who held Ritter in great esteem). Therefore, many
Chemie, Annalen der Physik, Voigts Magazin. In of his findings went unnoticed, only to be inde-
1799/1800, shortly after the English chemist pendently rediscovered by other scientists later on.
William Nicholson had succeeded in decomposing It took over a century before his scientific work was
water into hydrogen and oxygen by electrolysis, given due credit. Ritter died an embittered man a
Ritter improved the process greatly. These contri- few weeks after his thirty-third birthday.
butions paved the way for his invention in 1800 of Ritter’s imaginary revolves around a number of
electroplating, which is still currently used to plate symbols which he intends less as metaphors than as
gold, silver and other metals. Besides, in line with metaphysical truths. Objective observations are
one of the prevalent views of Naturphilosophie, raised up to the level of a theosophical dramaturgy,
namely, that an electrical polarity pervades Nature, so much so that the facts revealed by scientific
he put forward the hypothesis that invisible radia- experimentation are supposed to give an account
tion beyond the visible red should be paired to of mythical recitals. For example, in Ritter the
invisible radiation beyond the violet. This led physical element fire refers to an ontological reality,
in 1801 (one year after William Herschel had to the point that “Fire” must become the ‘myth of
announced the existence of the infrared region) to science’, and physics the science of Fire, because in
his greatest scientific accomplishment, the discov- the latter all the energies of the world are enclosed
ery by chemical means of a previously unknown (‘On Physics considered as an Art’). In oxidation he
region of the solar spectrum, namely ultraviolet sees more than a chemical process only. Oxidation
radiation. The same year he observed thermoelec- is burning, and therefore cult, prayer, and respira-
tric currents, investigated the artificial electrical tion are also forms of oxidation (Fragment 599):
excitation of muscles, and anticipated the discov- ‘Woman is the oxygenable, Man is the oxygenizing.
ery of thermoelectricity by Thomas Johann See- This is why Woman gains weight in love, like all
beck. Additional inventions of his soon followed, the bodies that oxygenate’ (Fragment 636). The
most notably the first dry-cell battery in 1802 and notion of polarity, widely shared in that period
the first electrical storage battery (or accumulator) among Naturphilosophen and German philoso-
in 1803. One of his latest interests was dowsing phers in general, is prevalent in Ritter. In this
(rhabdomancy), whose connection to galvanism he connection, he holds that the Earth, since it is the
tried to demonstrate, thereby elaborating the the- object of oxygenation processes, in-breathes solar
ory of what he called “Siderismus”. energies and out-breathes lunar ones. Therefore,
Despite his strong personal connections in the the Moon is hydrogen par excellence (Fragment

--- Page 420 ---
RITTER 996
527). The opposite pole of Light is Gravity (as in Beweiss, dass ein stindiger Galvanismus den Leben-
sprocess in dem Tierreich begleite..., Weimar,Schelling), which means that matter is nothing but
1798 @ Beitrdge zur naberen Kenntnis des Galvanis-
a condensed Light (Fragment 266).
mus und der Resultate seiner Untersuchung, 2 vol.
Many of Ritter’s writings resonate with paracel- (in 8 Books), Iena, 1800-1805 # Das elektrische
sian notions [> Paracelsianism]. He considers System der Korper, lena, 1805 # Die Physik als Kunst:
physics as a physiology, not the reverse. During the Ein Versuch, die Tendenz der Physik aus ihrer Ge-
Golden Age there were no inorganic forms, and schichte zu deuten, Munich: Joseph Lindauer, 1806 ¢
this means that science has to be genetic, not ahis- Physikalisch-chemische Abhanndlungen in chronolo-
gischer Folge, 3 vol., Leipzig, 1806 ¢ Neue Beitragetorical as it usually claims to be. The whole solar
zur naberen Kenntnis des Galvanismus ... oder der
system is within Man, and each of us is a universe
Siderismus, vol. 1 (no subsequent one), Tubingen,
in miniature (Fragment 451). Celestial bodies are 1808 ¢ Fragmente aus dem Nachlasse eines jungen
the sanguine corpuscles of the cosmos; the Milky Physikers, Ein Taschenbuch fur Freunde der Natur,
Way is its muscles; and Ether runs through its 2 vols., Heidelberg: Mohr und Zimmer, 1810; Reprint:
nerves. In addition to that, Ritter is looking for the Leipzig/Weimar: Kiepenheuer, 1984; Reprint: Lambert
“original forms”. Resonant with Goethe’s quest for Schneider, 1969, 2 vol. in one (Reihe — Goethezeit, hrg.
an “Urpflanze”, Ritter wrote in 1808 that he would von Arthur Henkel), Postface by Heinrich Schipperges;
French trans. by Claude Maillard, Fragments post-
like to be able to arrest or fix a spark (to petrify it),
humes tirés des papiers d’un jeune physicien: Vade-
because this would enable us to see the ‘Normal- mecum a l’usage des amis de la nature, Premieres
Figur’ (normative figure) to which all organic and Pierres: Charenton, 2001, Introduction by Yves Wat-
inorganic forms of Nature could be brought back. tenberg « Der Physiker des Romantikerkreises Johann
Ritter, well read in the writings of such theoso- Wilhelm Ritter in seinen Briefen and den Verleger
phers as > Jacob Boehme, > Baader and > Saint- Carl Friedrich Ernst Frommann (Klaus Richter, ed.),
Martin, posited that matter was created in order Weimar: Heinz Bohlhaus Nachfolger, 1988, 85-148.
to undo the wrath brought about by the Fall of
Lit.: Antoine Faivre, “Physique et métaphysique du feu
Lucifer. ‘Through Light, the Earth remembers chez Johann Wilhelm Ritter”, in: A. Faivre, Philoso-
times of old’ (Fragment 517). The inner radiation phie de la Nature (Physique sacrée et Théosophie
of precious stones is laden with promise and is a X VIII°-XIX° siécle), Paris: Albin Michel, 1996, 267-
reminder of the brightness of our Lost Paradise 304 (1st version in Etudes Philosophiques 1, 1983) ¢
(‘Electrical System of Bodies’). The Earth appears Daniel Giroux, Lettres d’un physicien théosophe:
to us as a great conflagration, which is now extin- J.W. Ritter a J.W. Goethe, K. von Savigny, G.H. von
Schubert, F. von Hardenberg, H.C. Oersted, F. von
guished and of which only a few sparks remain. In
Baader. Présentation, traduction et notes de Daniel
a parallel to Paul’s Rom. 8:19-22, Ritter says that Giroux, diss. University of Dijon, 1973 (unpublished)
the fault of that conflagration lies with Man, and ¢ Wolfgang Hartwig, Physik als Kunst: Uber die natur-
that it is incumbent upon us to awaken that Fire philosophischen Gedanken Johann Wilhelm Ritters,
from its sleep (‘On Physics considered as an Art’). diss. Albert Ludwig University in Freiburg-in-Breigau,
He also deals theosophically with issues bearing on 1955 (unpublished) # Klaus Richter, Der Physiker des
Romantikerkreises Johann Wilhelm Ritter in seinenthe origin of mankind. For example, he compares
Briefen and den Verleger Carl Friedrich Ernst From-
Eve, who was created without the aid of a woman,
mann (Klaus Richter, ed.), Weimar: Heinz Bohlhaus
to Christ, for whom the reverse was the case. He Nachfolger, 1988, 7-84 # idem, Das Leben des Physik-
announces the advent of an androgyne Christ, in a ers Johann Wilhelm Ritter: Ein Schicksal in der Zeit
time when both sexes will fuse into one, and he der Romantik, Weimar: H. Bohlhaus Nacht, 2003 ¢
links his reflections on that subject to > alchemy, in Jurgen Teichmann, “Johann Wilhelm Ritter — Ein
particular to the elixir of Life (Fragments 518, romantischer Physiker”, in: W.C. Zimmerli etc. (ed.),
602). In one of the most beautiful passages of Ger- Fesselung durch die Systeme, Stuttgart/Bad Cannstadt:
Fromann-Holzboog, 1997, 331-334 # Walter D. Wet-
man —~ Romanticism, Ritter celebrates Sun and
zels, Johann Wilhelm Ritter, Physik im Wirkungsfeld
Moon, Man and Woman: ‘The Moon is a secret der deutschen Romantik, Berlin/New York: Walter
love letter that the Sun sends to the Earth, it is the de Gruyter, 1973 idem, “Johann Wilhelm Ritter:
reflection of the surge of love of man toward his Romantic Physics in Germany”, in: A. Cunningham
beloved’ (Fragment 518). Such writings are a blend (ed.), Romanticism and the Sciences, Cambridge:
of science and art, of content and form. Novalis’s Cambridge University Press, 1990, 199-212.
remark is pertinent: ‘Ritter’s quest is throughout
the true World Soul of the universe. His purpose is ANTOINE FAIVRE
to read the visible letters which one can weigh, and
to account for the typographic composition of the Rivail, Denizard Hyppolyte Léon >
highly spiritual energies’. Kardec, Allen

--- Page 421 ---
OO7), ROBERTS
Robert of Chester, fl. between r140 Roberts, Dorothy Jane, * 8.5.1929
and 1150 Saratoga Springs, New York,
t 5.9.1984 Elmira, New York
Robert, sometimes also known as Robert of Ket-
ton or Robertus Rettinensis, was active between Jane Roberts — her first given name is never
1140 and 1150. We know of him first because, used — preferred to see herself as a poet and writer,
together with Hermann of Carinthia, he was but achieved fame by her books based upon “chan-
engaged by Peter the Venerable, abbot of Cluny, to neled” messages received from a “spiritual entity”
translate the Quran completed in 1143. He was called Seth. Her childhood was difficult: her par-
archdeacon of Pamplona from sometime around ents divorced while she was still a small child,
1143. He is also known to have spent time in and Jane spent some years in a Roman Catholic
Barcelona and Tuleda and was evidently in London orphanage. Having returned home, she was forced
between 1147 and 1150. to take care of the household while looking after
His translation of al-Khwarizmi’s Algebra com- her invalid, psychotic and abusive mother. Already
pleted at Segovia in 1145 introduced not only the at the orphanage she had begun writing poetry,
word but the techniques of algebra to the Latin which seems to have been considered “heretical”
West. He was responsible for the revision of several by the nuns. In her senior year in high school, hon-
astronomical tables for the meridian of London orable mention in a poetry contest sponsored by
based upon tables of al-Khwarizmi, al-Zarqallu Scholastic Magazine earned her a scholarship to
and al-Battani. Hermann of Carinthia identifies Skidmore College (Saratoga), but she was expelled
him as the translator of the Opus astronomicum of after a year for having attended an all-night party
al-Battani, a work which does not survive. Two at a professor’s house. Having placed her mother
treatises, one on the construction of the universal in a nursing home, she took off on a motorcycle
astrolabe and the other on the use of the plani- with a boyfriend, to visit her father in California.
spheric astrolabe, also circulated under his name. Back in Saratoga, she married the boyfriend,
He was probably also responsible for a redaction Walter Zeh, and began working in various small
of Adelard of Bath’s translation of Euclid’s jobs. In 1953 she instantly fell in love with thirty-
Elements. four year old artist Robert F Butts. Having
Robert is perhaps best known for his connection divorced her first husband, she married Butts on
with the early stages of the transmission of Arabic December 27, 1954. The marriage seems to have
~ alchemy to the Latin west. The Arabic term al- been a happy one, with both partners agreeing
kimiya’ may have been first introduced as alkimia from the outset about a life single-mindedly
to Latin readers before 1141 by Hugo of Santalla devoted to their artistic and literary work. They
whose translation of the Tabula smaragdina was lived first in Tenafly, New Jersey, supporting them-
among the earliest significant texts. But the trans- selves with irregular jobs, then moved to Butts’
lation of the first substantive text on alchymia, the hometown Sayre in Pennsylvania. In 1960 they set-
Liber Morient, is commonly attributed to Robert. tled in Elmira, New York, where they would
Objections have been raised to this attribution, remain for the rest of Jane’s life.
however, due to its relatively late date (13th In 1956 Jane Roberts’ career as a science-fiction
century) and the association of the name with writer began with a story titled “The Red Wagon”,
what appears to be a later redaction of the original published in Fantasy and Science Fiction Maga-
translation. zine. Interestingly, given the later Seth messages,
the story was about past-life memories, and in
Lit.: Charles Burnett, “The Astrologer’s Assay of the fact the subject of > reincarnation appears in her
Alchemist: Early References to Alchemy in Arabic
poetry at least as early as 1954. “The Red Wagon”
and Latin Texts”, Ambix 39: 3 (1992), 103-109 ¢
L. Stavenhagen, A Testament of Alchemy, Hanover, was followed by several dozen other stories pub-
New Hampshire: Brandise University Press, 1974 ¢ lished in Fantasy & Science Fiction journals and
Hubert L.L. Busard and Menso Folkerts, Robert of “men’s magazines”, and three novels: The Chest-
Chester’s (?) Redaction of Euclid’s Elements: The so- nut Beads (1957), The Bundu (1958) and The
called Adelard II Version, Basel, Boston, Berlin: Rebellers (1963). Apart from a strain of apocalyp-
Birkhauser, 1992 # R. Lemay, “LAuthenticité de la
ticism reflecting concern about impending nuclear
préface de Robert de Chester 4 sa traduction du
holocaust, a strong interest in the untapped poten-
Morienus (1144)”, Chrysopoeia 4 (1990), 3-32.
tials of the human mind is evident already from
FRANK KLAASSEN this early production, but after the disappointing

--- Page 422 ---
ROBERTS 998
production of The Rebellers (bound in a cheap and interviews (see Watkins 2001, 209-210).
paperback together with another novel), her inter- Although her books made her famous as a psychic,
est in the Science Fiction genre began to decline. she disliked that label and its associations, and
The turning point in Jane Roberts’ life occurred seems to have always experienced a strong aversion
in the afternoon of september 9, 1963. According against the “New Age” circuit [> New Age move-
to her own report, while quietly sitting at the ment]: ‘As a writer I feel free to be as psychic as a
dinner table she was suddenly and unexpectedly bird, do what I please, and use my abilities psychi-
hit by an overwhelming “psychedelic” experience: cally quite freely. When I think of me as a psychic I
‘Between one normal minute and the next, a fan- get hung up because I seem to be in the company of
tastic avalanche of radical, new ideas burst into my so many nuts’ (journal 26.3.1972, in Watkins
head with tremendous force, as if my skull were ZOOmuI22))s
some sort of receiving station, turned up to unbear- In 1965 Roberts began to experience the first
able volume’ (Roberts 1970, ch. 1). Roberts felt symptoms of rheumatic arthritis, from which her
herself travelling at top speed through multiple mother had been suffering as well. Over the years
dimensions of reality, while her hands were scrib- her physical problems grew steadily worse, and
bling down the ideas that rushed through her head. from the late 1970s on she also developed thyroid.
When she came back to normal consciousness, she Refusing regular medical treatment until a very late
had written down a manuscript titled The Physical stage, she finally had to be hospitalized; she died in
Universe as Idea Construction, which eventually 1984 after a long and difficult sickbed.
turned out to contain many of the core ideas that Throughout her life, Jane Roberts was single-
would be developed in the Seth sessions. Trying to mindedly devoted to her writing, and of her total
understand what had happened, Jane and her hus- output (now at Yale University, Sterling Memorial
band developed an interest in extrasensory percep- Library, ms.group nr. 1090) only a small part has
tion (ESP); in fact, she lost no time in drafting a been published. Interestingly, and consistent with
proposal for a book about how to develop ESP, the complex theory of the relation between mind
even though (always according to her own report) and reality developed in the Seth material, she con-
she was almost completely ignorant about the sidered literary creativity and psychic manifesta-
subject. Having received a positive response from tions as intimately related, and always preferred
her publisher, the couple began to experiment to see herself primarily as a writer and poet: ‘The
with the Ouija board, which at the third attempt psychic stuff literally came out of the poetry...’
began to spell messages from a “Frank Withers” (journal 5.5.1972, in Watkins 2zoo1, 114). The
who claimed to have lived in Elmira and died in the series of Seth books that were published from 1970
19408, and to have known Jane and Robert in Den- on, and several of her “own” books not attributed
mark during a previous life. On december 8, 1963, to Seth as the source, contain a comprehensive
the spirit announced that his real name was Seth, “spiritual” worldview based upon a complex the-
and began addressing Robert and Jane as Joseph ory of mind and reality.
and Ruburt. Over the next sessions Jane noticed The Sethian worldview is explained with con-
she began anticipating the Ouija board’s answers in siderable intellectual subtlety. It is based upon
her head, until she felt impelled to speak them out a concept of the soul (also referred to as “multi-
aloud. Thus the seances developed into “channel- dimensional personality” or “entity”) defined as
ing” sessions, during which Jane would go into a conscious, unlimited energy that is continuously
full trance while Seth “possessed” her body and seeking to express itself. It does so by creating
spoke through her with a male voice and in a char- “realities” and identifying itself with them. Each
acteristic style entirely different from her own. human being is in fact a “fragment personality”
Robert Butts would converse with Seth and note unconsciously participating in a much larger group
down the questions and answers in shorthand, and entity or oversoul; we all “create our own reality”
these transcripts became the foundation for the on the basis of our beliefs, and derive our sense of
series of Seth books published by Jane from 1970 identity from focusing more or less exclusively on
on. In 1966 she had already published her book on the products of our own creative > imagination
How to Develop your ESP Power and a year later while blocking from conscious awareness the mul-
she had begun to teach ESP classes in her home, tiple alternative realities that are available to us.
during which she would frequently go into trance, The reality shared by us as human beings is char-
with Seth speaking through her with the partici- acterized by the categories of linear time and three-
pants; these classes continued regularly from 1967 dimensional space; but in fact, reality consists of an
to 1975. In addition she gave occasional lectures unlimited number of dimensions, most of which

--- Page 423 ---
999 ROBERTS
are beyond our capacity of understanding, and does not exist: ‘The reincarnational structure is a
time does not exist. psychological one. It cannot be understood in any
These principles are developed with relentless other terms. . . . The reality, the validity, the imme-
logic into a radical multidimensional worldview diacy of those lives do exist simultaneously with
reminiscent of the so-called “many-worlds theory” your present life. The distance between one life
in quantum physics. Since even the tiniest move- and another exists psychologically, and not in
ment of consciousness is inherently creative, it terms of years or centuries. . . . Reincarnation, as it
inevitably gets realized. Thus, whenever in our is usually explained ...is a myth’ (Seth Speaks,
daily life we choose between A and B, this causes 447/449).
our personality to split up into two fragments Some sources of the Sethian worldview are obvi-
focused on two parallel universes: one in which we ous: there are clear references to e.g. Emersonian
have chosen A, another in which we have chosen B. Transcendentalism, William James (the subject of
Any soul’s consciousness may therefore be imag- an entire book written by Roberts), and popular
ined as an explosion of “fragments” that continu- accounts of modern relativity physics and psychol-
ously multiply in an infinite number of parallel ogy. The insistence that we can create our reality by
realities, each one of which is experienced as “the” our conscious beliefs reflects not only basic > New
only reality by the fragment that is focused on it. Thought convictions, but also a concern about the
Seth devotes detailed discussions to the concomi- suggestion of popular psychoanalytic literature
tant philosophical problems, such as the implica- that we are at the mercy of our unconscious drives.
tions for our concepts of personal “identity”, or the More research is needed to explore e.g. the sources
nature of “consensus reality” (Seth does not defend of Roberts’ early interest in reincarnation, or the
solipsism, but claims that consensus reality is per- extent of her familiarity with > spiritualism.
manently being created as an unconscious and Regardless of such backgrounds, the Sethian
automatic telepathic compromise agreed upon by synthesis is remarkable for its originality and inter-
our souls). nal consistency. Its optimistic and world-affirming
Just like each personality is a fragment of a much spirituality and its message that all of us have the
larger soul or “entity”, entities in turn are parts of power to create our own reality by changing our
a god-like super-entity, referred to as All That Is beliefs has strongly appealed to many readers since
(and Seth speculates that perhaps All That Is him- the 1970s. Detailed analysis of the literature of the
self might be a fragment of an even larger entity, ~» New Age movement shows that its basic ideas
and so on ad infinitum). All That Is strives for self- are modeled after Seth’s worldview to such a degree
realization by means of unfolding his infinite cre- (Hanegraaff 1996/1998, 126 and passim) that,
ative potential in a dazzling expansion of multiple without exaggeration, Jane Roberts should be rec-
realities: a process that is never-ending, and yet ognized as one of the major religious innovators in
takes place not in space-time but in what is called Western society after World War II. Given her piv-
the “spacious present”. Conscious participation in otal role in creating the foundations of a compre-
this process is what gives meaning to human life: hensive belief system now widely diffused through
‘You are here to use, enjoy, and express yourself Western popular culture, she has been surprisingly
through the body. You are here to aid in the great neglected by scholars of Western esotericism and of
expansion of consciousness. You are [here] . . . to new religious movements. A major critical mono-
create the spirit as faithfully and beautifully as you graph is long overdue.
can in the flesh’ (The Nature of Personal Reality,
28). While our “higher self” remains permanently The Rebellers, Ace paperback, 1963 ¢ How to
linked to our “multi-dimensional personality”, it Develop your ESP Power, Frederick Fell, 1966 (and
several reprints under different titles) ¢ The Seth Mate-
guides our ego and personal subconscious through
rial, Prentice-Hall, 1970 ¢ Seth Speaks: The Eternal
an endless series of lives, during which we experi- Validity of the Soul, Prentice-Hall, 1972 ¢ The Educa-
ence our self-created realities. Eventually we will tion of Oversoul Seven, Prentice-Hall, 1973 ¢ The
learn to make conscious and responsible use of our Nature of Personal Reality: A Seth Book, Prentice-
creative abilities (whereas at present most of us do Hall, 1974 # Adventures in Consciousness: An Intro-
so unconsciously and irresponsibly), after which duction to Aspect Psychology, Prentice-Hall, 1975
Dialogues of the Soul and Mortal Self in Time, Pren-
we will be ready to “graduate” to even higher
tice-Hall, 1975 # Psychic Politics: An Aspect Psychol-
cycles of development presently beyond our capac- ogy Book, Prentice-Hall, 1976 ¢ The World View of
ity of imagination. Conventional concepts of rein- Paul Cézanne: A Psychic Interpretation, Prentice-Hall,
carnation are ultimately misleading, because they 1977 ¢ The “Unknown” Reality: A Seth Book, 2 vols.,
suggest a linear development whereas actually time Prentice-Hall, 1977/1979 # The Afterdeath Journal of

--- Page 424 ---
ROBERTS 1000
an American Philosopher: The World View of William national Romanticisms of Germany, Britain, and
James, Prentice-Hall, 1978 ¢ The Nature of the Psy- France; and within those national Romanticisms,
che: Its Human Expression. A Seth Book, Prentice- distinctions must be made by generation or place.
Hall, 1979 # Emir’s Education in the Proper Use of Thus there are the German Romanticisms of
Magical Powers, Prentice-Hall, 1979 # The Further
1798-1800, 1806, and 1808-1810, or those of
Education of Oversoul Seven, Prentice-Hall, 1979 ¢
The Individual and the Nature of Mass Events: A Seth Jena, Heidelberg, and Munich; there are the British
Book, Prentice-Hall, r981 ¢ The God ofJane: A Psy- Romanticisms of Wordsworth and Coleridge and
chic Manifesto, Prentice-Hall, 1981 # Oversoul Seven of Byron, Shelley, and Keats; and there is the
and the Museum of Time, Prentice-Hall, 1984 ¢ Catholic and royalist French Romanticism that
Dreams, “Evolution”, and Value Fulfillment: A Seth begins in 1801 and the anti-clerical and liberal
Book, 2 vols., Prentice-Hall, 1986.
Romanticism that begins in the late 1820s. The
Lit.: Gene Carroccia, “Seth and the New Paradigm: principal representatives of the western esoteric
Understandings of the Soul, Mind, Body, Symptoms, tradition for Romantic thinkers are ~ Jacob
and Personal Reality”, Ph.D. dissertation, Illinois Boehme, > Emanuel Swedenborg, > Louis-Claude
School of Professional Psychology, 1998 # Wouter J. de Saint-Martin, > Antoine Fabre d’Olivet, > Karl
Hanegraaff, “Channeling-literatuur: Een vergelijking von Eckhartshausen, and > Franz von Baader. >
tussen de boodschappen van Seth, Armerus, Ramala,
Illuminism is a subset of the esoteric tradition cor-
en ‘A Course in Miracles’”, Religieuze Bewegingen in
Nederland 22 (1991), 9-44 ¢ idem, New Age Religion responding to the last decades of the 18th century
and Western Culture: Esotericism in the Mirror of and the first decades of the rgth century. There is
Secular Thought, Leiden, New York, Koln: E.J. a strong Boehmenist component to Illuminism
Brill, 1996/Albany: SUNY Press, 1998 (passim, see (hence the Romantics’ tendency to equate I|lumin-
index) « Arthur Hastings, With the Tongues of Men ism and theosophy), though other esoteric currents
and Angels: A Study of Channeling, Fort Worth etc.:
are also present.
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1991, 72-78 ¢
Jon Klimo, Channeling: Investigations on Receiving
Information from Paranormal Sources, Los Angeles: 1. ONTOLOGY
Jeremy P. Tarcher 1987; 2nd exp. ed. Berkeley: North The God of Romanticism is no longer, as for the
Atlantic Books, 1998 ¢ Susan M. Watkins, Speaking of Enlightenment, an architect, a clockmaker, a judge,
Jane Roberts: Remembering the Author of the Seth or a paternalistic pedagogue. Freed from the
Material, Portsmouth, New Hampshire: Moment rational fetters which made the God of the Enlight-
Point Press, 2001 ¢ Exhaustive bibliography by Barry
enment a captive of human categories of under- C. Noonan on _http://newworldview.com/library/
Noonan_B_Works_Jane_Roberts.html standing, the Absolute of > F.W.J. von Schelling or
the Infinite of Victor Hugo and Jules Michelet is
WOUTERJ. HANEGRAAFF incommensurable with human knowledge; our rea-
son, Friedrich Schlegel observed, can attain only a
negative idea of the Infinite. Behind the Romantic
Robertus Rettinensis > Robert of
notion of Divinity is the Ungrund, the essential
Chester
Non-being of Boehme which wills Being into exis-
tence. Subsequent Boehmenist theosophy con-
Romanticism ceives of God as the ens manifestativum sui, the
Life-principle that strives from a dark original
1. ONTOLOGY 2. EPISTEMOLOGY cause toward its own realization and corporealiza-
3. LINGUISTICS AND POETICS tion. Divine self-realization, or theogony, means
4. INITIATION 5. MYTH AND that God actualizes himself progressively in the
RELIGION 6. PHILOSOPHY OF HISTORY development of life. This divine unfolding has a
7. NATURPHILOSOPHIE 8. ROMANTICISM dark aspect; evil and suffering are not external to
AND ESOTERICISM God, but arise as an eternal moment of theogony.
And since creation is part of the self-manifestation
Rather than attempt an exhaustive catalogue of and self-realization of the divine nature, it too is
the connections between esotericism and Romanti- characterized by conflict and suffering. This gives
cism, this entry is structured as a set of brief essays rise to what the Romantics called the Nachtseite
on interrelated topics, illustrated with representa- der Natur (the nocturnal side of nature). From
tive thinkers, and followed by some remarks on the about 1806, Schelling’s metaphysical thinking
relationship between esotericism and Romanti- reflects his reading of Boehmenist theosophy and
cism. Romanticism is a diverse historical phenom- his discussion of it with Franz von Baader. Under its
enon: at the very least, one must distinguish the influence, he attempted to incorporate genetic and

--- Page 425 ---
IOol ROMANTICISM
volitional principles into the very core of ontology. jective knowledge of the interpenetration of the
The theosophical influence is clearly discernible finite and the Infinite. Coleridge alternatively refers
in Die Weltalter (1811-1813, published posthu- to the faculty of reason as the imagination. This
mously), in which Schelling undertakes a logical epistemology, by which, in Biographia Literaria
analysis of the ontological relations that constitute (1817), he theorized the great poetry of his early
the eternal process that is God. Schelling inter- collaboration with William Wordsworth in Lyrical
prets history and nature, the unfolding of the pre- Ballads (1798), also underlies his approach to reli-
existent divine nature, as both a theogony (divine gious knowledge in later theological works such as
self-revelation and self-actualization) and a soteri- Aids to Reflection (1825).
ology (restoration of Creation to unity with God). The refusal to accept Kantian epistemological
The esoteric tradition depicts creation as the pessimism also applies to the Illuminists them-
emanated self-manifestation of God. The world is selves. In Vers dorés de Pythagore (1813), Fabre
a vital infinite reality in which all phenomena, as d’Olivet overcomes Kant’s epistemological pessim-
emblems of the divine, provide symbolic or ana- ism, in a manner parallel to Schelling, by redefining
logical knowledge of the links between divinity, the reason as an intuitive faculty capable of grasping
self, and the world. Despite the Fall, light from the the ontological Absolute. More commonly, how-
spiritual world is invisibly active in the sunlight of ever, the supra-rational epistemological faculty cel-
our world, just as the spiritual nature of creation ebrated by the esoteric tradition is the imagination.
remains present, though hidden, at the heart of the Predicated on the optimistic presupposition that
physical world. The cosmos is thereby a universe the Fall has obscured but not entirely blocked our
of mirrors and > correspondences. The Romantic perception of the divine light pervading the uni-
cosmos is the emanated, living, analogically-linked verse, esotericism maintains that the imagination,
cosmos of the esoteric tradition, and the Romantic whether Boehme’s “eye of fire” or Saint-Martin’s
quest, like that of the esotericists, is to create or and Baader’s “organ of the soul”, sees through the
restore a lost harmony through poetic vision, the world of appearances to the spiritual world hidden
restoration of language, initiation, the study of within and enables access to different levels of
myths and religions, the restructuring of society, reality through the use of mediations such as sym-
and contemplation of nature. bolic images.
Esotericism nourished Romanticism in _ its
2. EPISTEMOLOGY aspirations toward knowledge of the Absolute.
Romanticism’s epistemological signature is its F. Schlegel proclaimed that the highest philoso-
refusal to accept the Kantian disjunction between phy — the science of the nature and relations of
the phenomenal and noumenal worlds. Kant’s Kri- divinity — is theosophy, and called for religion
tik der reinen Vernunft (1781) made the noumenal and philosophy to unite. Schelling’s early philoso-
realm of ultimate truth inaccessible to rational phy, drawing on J.G. Fichte’s Wissenschaftslebre
knowledge. Romantics claim to grasp, directly or (1794), transformed Boehmenist imagination, by
mediately, the ontological Absolute through an adding the elements of subjectivism and volun-
extra-rational faculty: intuition, > imagination, or tarism, into an imagination that, rather than real-
a reconceptualized reason. Schelling attempted to izing a synthesis of the Infinite and determinate
elude Kantian epistemological pessimism by recon- forms, actively gives birth to the entire perceptible
ceptualizing reason as a transcendental insight or world. This transformist sense of imagination
intuition that communicates with the Pure Actual- characterizes Jena Romanticism. For ~ Novalis
ity of the Godhead. Friedrich Schleiermacher simi- (Friedrich von Hardenberg), the imagination
larly asserts, in Reden iiber die Religion (1799), places one in synchrony with the rhythm of the
that intuition is the centre of religious life because universe, thereby enabling one to change it. The
it alone brings us into contact with the Infinite. In transformist imagination persists in later German
Britain, Samuel Taylor Coleridge responded to romantic literature, as in the poetry of Achim von
Kant’s challenge to metaphysical knowledge by Arnim and the stories of E. T. A. Hoffmann. Baude-
distinguishing between the faculties of understand- laire’s imagination similarly illuminates, animates,
ing and of reason. His distinction, a variation of and transfigures material reality. For > William
Schelling’s reconceptualization of reason, concedes Blake, the imagination, which he calls Poetic
that Enlightenment rationalism, or the understand- Genius or Spirit of Prophecy in The Marriage of
ing, cannot attain ontological truth but insists that Heaven @& Hell (1790), transcends the limits of
reason, the “organ of the supersensuous”, directly rationality and sense perception in order to discern
apprehends ontological truth and produces sub- the spiritual essence that is eternal and infinite in

--- Page 426 ---
ROMANTICISM IOO02
every living thing and in ourselves. Blake was humanity is possible because something of the orig-
influenced by Swedenborg, but turned to Boehme inal language remains in our degenerate languages.
and other esoteric writers when he decided that This something is the ability of language to express
Swedenborg’s grasp on divine truth had been spiritual reality, not directly or literally, to be sure,
weakened by concessions to scientific rationality but indirectly through correspondences, symbols,
and that Swedenborgians sought spiritual escape figures, and analogies. This indirect speech, which
from the world rather than to transform it. we call poetry, participates in the divine powers,
Since the universe is a vital infinite reality, in per- thereby linking humanity to God and apprehend-
petual becoming, Romanticism rejects the ideal of ing the unity of creation.
an objective, systematic account of a fixed order Romanticism embraced the esoteric conception
(of ontology or human affairs or nature or any- of poetry as symbolic knowledge and the key to an
thing else). True knowledge is subjective and non- analogical world, of the poet as the recipient and
systematic. Michelet’s historical method is to grasp transmitter of revelation, and of a recoverable uni-
its subject from the inside, by an act of sympathy versal language. F. Schlegel and Novalis, writing in
(preface to Histoire de France [1869]). Novalis and the Athenaeum (1798-1800), celebrate the poet as
FE. Schlegel insist that true knowledge is interior, a priest who will lead humanity to its eschatologi-
affirming Ludwig Tieck’s description in Phantasus cal fulfilment by relinking the world here below
(1844) of the vocation of man as ‘circumnavigator and divine transcendence. The symbolic imagina-
of our interior world’. Tieck, Clemens Brentano, tion of Pierre-Simon Ballanche’s poet-seer — exem-
his sister Bettina, and Achim von Arnim (Bettina’s plified in his Vision d’Hébal (1831) and discussed
husband) polemicized against systematic thought. in Book Seven of Orphée (1829) — intuits spiritual
Romanticism, like the esoteric tradition, replaces truths and translates them into material form;
systematic thought with correspondences, simili- poetry is the intuitive faculty of penetrating the
tudes, harmonies, and analogies. By these tropes, essence of beings and things. Romantic poetry,
Novalis said, humanity becomes aware of itself from Novalis to Joseph von Eichendorff, Alphonse
through the experience of the dynamic, developing de Lamartine to Hugo, Wordsworth to John Keats,
universe in which it lives. Such knowledge trans- decodes and celebrates the presence of Divinity in
forms its possessor; Romantic knowledge is salvific the beings and things of the natural world. Since
knowledge. analogy reveals and materializes the unity of divine
creation, the symbolic image ceases to be merely
3. LINGUISTICS AND POETICS decorative and instead conveys meaning. The best-
Esoteric linguistics, prominent in the Romantic known poetic statements of this theory of har-
period thanks to Saint-Martin and Fabre d’Olivet, monies are ~ Gérard de Nerval’s sonnet “Vers
among others, holds that behind the present dorés” (1845) and Charles Baudelaire’s “Corre-
cacophony of languages lies a single, primitive, lan- spondances”.
guage. This Adamic tongue enabled the first human Esoteric poetics charges the poet with communi-
beings to participate in the divine speech that had cating spiritual truth (or at least the portion of it
created the universe. In the primitive language of vouchsafed to him) to his contemporaries. Yet, the
humanity spoken before the Fall, words corre- communicative obligation collides with the limits
sponded to the essence of the things they named. of linguistic communication. That which can be
Present-day languages, in which words no longer said literally is fallen; spiritual truth can only be
have an evident relation to the things that they des- hinted at by means of correspondences, symbols,
ignate, are as they are because of the Fall. The reha- figures, and analogies. The limitation of language
bilitation of humanity is linked to the recovery of to express spiritual truth reappears in Romanti-
the original, universal, divinely natural language of cism, as does the poet’s awareness that he has
humanity. This recovery is possible because traces glimpsed only a portion of the truth (this is why
of the primitive language remain in one (Hebrew the fragment is a characteristic Romantic genre).
was the usual candidate), or a few, historical lan- Ballanche resigned himself to the fact that his
guages. These traces might one day be assembled “true book” would never be written; the spiritually
and the primitive language reconstructed, thereby acute reader must discern his true teaching from
restoring humanity to unity and direct communi- the symbols of his texts. Here, as in the case
cation with God. Fabre d’Olivet illustrates this of other notoriously obscure Romantic works,
metalinguistic procedure in La langue hébraique including such landmarks as Novalis’ Hymnen
restituée (1815-1816). More typically, Saint-Mar- an die Nacht (1802) and Nerval’s Les Chiméres
tin asserts that recovery of the original language of (1844-1854), the author did not willfully encrypt

--- Page 427 ---
1003 ROMANTICISM
that which could have been expressed clearly; “Ce que dit la Bouche d’Ombre” (1854) lead to
obscurity is a consequence of the epistemological Enjolras’ profession of faith on the barricades
necessity of symbolic circumlocution of spiritual in Les Misérables. Many Romantic philosophi-
truths. cal epics are also tales of initiation, including so-
True poetry, for Illuminism, displays a historical cial transformation through initiation. The great
aspect because the relationship of humanity to example here is Ballanche’s Essais de Palingénésie
God — the subject of poetry — is the drama of the sociale (1827-1831) in which social palingenesis,
Fall and the regeneration to come. Saint-Martin’s or social evolution, operates by means of the pro-
ideal of poetry as metaphysical, narrative, and gressive initiation of humanity into knowledge of
prophetic reappears as one of the characteristic the primitive revelation and full participation in
genres of French Romanticism: the philosophical religion and society. Each successive initiation rep-
epic. Ballanche offers both a theory of the Roman- resents a social evolutionary advance, the sum of
tic epic in chapter ten of Essai sur les Institutions which constitute the rehabilitation of humanity
sociales (1818) and an exemplar, Orphée. Other from the Fall. Another influential example is the
notable efforts include Alfred de Vigny, Eloa religious humanitarianism of Pierre Leroux’s De
(1824), Edgar Quinet, Ahasvérus (1833), Alphonse l’Humanité (1840).
de Lamartine, Jocelyn (1836) and La Chute d’un
ange (1838), Alexandre Soumet, La Divine Epopée 5. MYTH AND RELIGION
(1840), and Hugo, La Légende des siécles (1859- Schelling identifies myths as intuitions of Spirit
1883). that cannot be made manifest by any other means.
F. Schlegel’s claim that all relation of humanity to
4. INITIATION the Infinite is religion is closely echoed by Hugo’s
Initiation — an ontological metamorphosis or assertion that the essence of religions is sentiment
purification of being effected along with and by of the Infinite. Romanticism revalorizes myths
means of knowledge of and participation in the as intuitions of Spirit and religions as stages in
hidden mysteries of the cosmos and God - is yet the unfolding, and humanity’s progressive appre-
another esoteric theme taken up by Romantic- hension, of Spirit. Romantic histories of religions
ism. In Romantic epistemology, the acquisition chart the unfolding of Spirit. Beginning with Uber
of spiritual truths both imperils the aspirant and, die Gottheiten von Samothrake (1815) and cul-
once successfully attained, transforms his being. In minating in Philosophie der Mythologie (1842)
the literary realm, works from Novalis’ Heinrich and Philosophie der Offenbarung (1841, both pub-
von Ofterdingen (1802) onwards are structured lished posthumously in 1854), Schelling arranges
around an initiatic quest; archetypically, a quest the mythologies and religions of the world into
for the Castle, the Sanctuary, the Treasure, the a history of religions according to the degree to
Secret, an ordeal of the Labyrinth or dark Forest, which each manifests the progressive self-actual-
an Ascent of the Mountain or Descent into the ization in human consciousness (including the sub-
Underworld. George Sand’s Consuelo and _ its conscious) of the divine nature. Other prominent
continuation, La Comtesse de Rudolstadt (1842- examples of what Quinet called the genealogy
1844), describe an initiation into a para-masonic of the Eternal within the limits of time include
sect. Hugo’s Les Misérables (1862) transfers initia- Joseph von Gorres, Mythengeschichte der asia-
tion from the realm of secret societies to social tischen Welt (1810), Friedrich Creutzer, Symbolik
reality; descent into the underworld becomes the und Mythologie der alten Volker (1810-1812),
struggle of a former convict against poverty and Benjamin Constant, De la Religion (1824-1831),
social annihilation. In Charles Nodier’s La Fée Ferdinand d’Eckstein’s articles in his journal,
aux miettes (1832), as in Nerval’s Aurélia (1855), Le Catholique (1826-1829), Quinet, Du génie
madness constitutes the descent into the under- des religions (1842), and Michelet, Le Bible de
world that leads to illumination. Even travel nar- l Humanité (1864).
ratives, such as the Voyage en Orient of both Since Romanticism holds that the essential con-
Lamartine (1835) and Nerval (1843), must also tent of myths and religions is the same everywhere
be recognized as accounts of the path to self- and at all times (that is, the unfolding of Spirit),
knowledge. Initiation may also encompass the dis- it follows that differences among them are only
covery of a truth which has social and political superficial and that there is no absolute distinction
implications: the eternal gospel of Sand’s Spiridion between Christianity and the other religions. There
(1839) is the vehicle of the social prophetism of La is, therefore, no hard and fast opposition between
Comtesse de Rudolstadt; the revelations of Hugo’s Romantics, such as Schelling and Ballanche, who

--- Page 428 ---
1004
ROMANTICISM
maintain that while all religions participate in The principal elements of Romantic thought
truth, Christianity is the highest expression of that on myth and religion — interior truth over external
truth, and those, such as Sand or Hugo, who deny expression, individual illumination over institu-
Christianity any special status. In each case, while tional structures, perennialism, syncretism, ana-
myths and religions are the vehicle of the universal logical hermeneutics — are also present, as the
revelation and embody truth, a hermeneutics is Romantics were aware, in esoteric writers. Even
necessary in order to recover the truth hidden the history of religions is represented in Fabre
beneath the disfigurations of myths and the exter- d’Olivet’s Histoire philosophique du genre humain
nalities of the various religions. Romanticism prac- (1824).
tices an analogical hermeneutics of myth and
religion that discovers an inner unity beneath the 6. PHILOSOPHY OF HISTORY
surface differences that seem so striking. Romantic philosophies of history arise from the
The Romantics apply the valorization of interior conjunction of an epistemology that grasps eternal
truth over external expression to their own reli- spiritual reality and an organic developmentalism
gious lives. One must remain entirely free, Novalis according to which essences unfold over time. As
says in Bliitenstaub (1802), to choose the mediator such, they express an antinomy basic to Romantic
by whom one is brought into contact with divinity; thought: they affirm the existence of eternal ideas
the least constraint nullifies religion. This idea is while at the same time asserting the meaningfulness
also at the heart of Schleiermacher’s Reden iiber die of history.
Religion. A core theme of Blake’s The Marriage of The Romantics found a concept of spiritual evo-
Heaven c& Hell is the superiority of the poetic lution in the esoteric tradition. For > EC. Oetinger,
genius of the artist over institutionalized religions the essence of created things contains not only the
and their priests; art is internal, original, and liber- form but also all the potentialities and possibilities
ating, whereas religion is external, derivative, and of realization of a thing. The unfolding of essences
oppressive. In France, Balzac’s religion of the is initiated by the operation of a secret interior
future will be an interior illumination, just as for impulse, which Oetinger calls ‘the electrical fire
Hugo, in Contemplation supréme (1863-1864), concealed in all things’. The unfolding of essences
religions are obstacles to the essence of religion. toward the full realization of spiritual corporeality
By displacing the idea of revelation from the out- is the theosophical sense of evolution. Schelling’s
side to the inside, Romantic religion escapes from interpretation, in Die Weltalter, of history and
institutional control and is identified with the spir- nature as the development, or self-actualization, of
itual life of the individual, whatever the form its the pre-existent divine nature is built on an essence-
activity takes: art, philosophy, or religion in the and-development model of evolution derived from
narrow sense. Boehmenist theosophy. And yet, Romantic philo-
Closely linked to the interiorization of religion is sophies of history, particularly French ones, depart
the recognition that religion must change and from the esoteric tradition in the importance they
develop as human beings achieve a progressively grant to temporalism and actual historical events.
better apprehension of Spirit. Romanticism pre- For the esoteric tradition, “process” is a dynamism
sumes the need for an ongoing aggiornamento of that unfolds outside of time. In Fabre d’Olivet’s
spirituality. F Schlegel, in Rede iiber die Mytholo- Histoire philosophique du genre humain, the his-
gie (1800), considering the culture of his day to tory of humanity is merely the playing out in time
be disenchanted as a result of the Enlightenment, of the consequences of the metaphysical principles
calls for the creation of a new mythology. He and contained in its essence. For Saint-Martin, as for
Novalis encouraged each other in the wish to found Fabre d’Olivet, while history is the arena in which
a new religion. Their desire was echoed in France reintegration is accomplished, historical events at
by, among others, Hugo, Leroux and Sand. To this most mark or symbolize phases of this process;
end, the Romantics both adapted old myths and they in no way effect it. The locus of reintegration
religions and created their own in order to meet the is the extra-historical interior life of individuals.
spiritual exigencies of their own day. Representa- History belongs to the fallen world of time and
tive Romantic myths include Orpheus, Oedipus, matter; reintegration does not redeem history, it
Cain, the Wandering Jew, Christ, Satan, the Revo- is a redemption from history. Romanticism radi-
lution, the Nation, Napoleon, Don Juan, the cally revalorizes history. Ballanche’s philosophy
Androgyne. The Romantics extended the cate- of history elaborated in Essais de Palingénésie
gory of sacred texts to include their own inspired sociale fuses the esoteric understanding of evolu-
works. tion as the process of spiritual rehabilitation with

--- Page 429 ---
1005 ROMANTICISM
historical-mindedness by reading historical events Nature as lifeless and mechanical. The idea of a
not merely as signs of the process of the reintegra- dead universe could only be convincing to those in
tion of the primordial Adam but as the necessary whom a total enslavement to rationality had
and efficacious means of the reintegration. Human degraded the faculty of the imagination. Natur-
beings themselves, under the guidance of Provi- philosophie looks inward as well as outward;
dence, work out their own rehabilitation in the knowledge of Nature and knowledge of oneself are
history of social institutions. The process is taken linked because the hidden core of both is Spirit.
a step further by Lamartine and Quinet in their Recognizing that the connaturality of the soul
philosophical epics, in which a rationalist per- and the world is manifested by the correlation of
fectibilitarianism substitutes for the esotericist microcosm and macrocosm, Baader applies to
telos of the rehabilitation of humanity from the Naturphilosophie the epistemological formula of
Fall. Here, historical progress, while providentially Saint-Martin: ‘it is necessary to explain things by
guided, is no longer merely the sign — as for the man and not man by things’. For Henrik Steffens,
esotericists — or even the means — as for Ballanche — study of the developmental history of the earth
of spiritual reintegration; it becomes the end in and its creatures ennobles us because it allows us
itself. Salvation is now conceived of as a spiritual- to grasp the unity of spiritual process in nature
ization of terrestrial humanity within the historical and ourselves. For Lorenz Oken, the philosophi-
process. Whereas the early Romantics historicized cal study of natural history can unify the Ger-
the esoteric process of reintegration, later Roman- man people with themselves and the world.
tics historicized reintegration itself. Schelling’s Ideen zu einer Philosophie der Natur
(1797) proposes that the philosopher can attain by
7. NATURPHILOSOPHIE investigation of Nature what the poetic vision
~ Naturphilosophie is the application of Roman- reveals spontaneously: a glimpse of that eternal
tic ideas on ontology and epistemology to the phys- and original unity that in Nature and history is
ical universe, just as its poetics and philosophy of rent asunder.
history are the applications of them to other epis- Naturphilosophie is linked with and overlaps
temic realms. Naturphilosophie, however, was pre- other early r9th-century investigations that seek to
dominantly a German phenomenon; in France, unveil the hidden forces of Nature and to read
despite the chapter on Naturphilosophie in Ger- essences, hidden natures and ideal types from out-
maine de Staél’s De l’Allemagne (1814), the savants waid appearances. The many roads to reunion
of the Institut national remained faithful to the with Nature set out in Novalis’ Die Lehrlinge zu
demands of positivity. Coleridge’s Theory of Life Sais (1802) indicate the range of the disciplines
(1816) is a rare British example of Naturphiloso- contributing to Romantic Naturphilosophie: cos-
phie, and depends heavily on German sources. mology and cosmogony, developmental history
Nature, for the Naturphilosophen, is a perpetu- of the earth and its creatures, investigations
ally living revelation. Franz von Baader, a geolo- of conscious and unconscious mental states, of
gist, mineralogist and professor at the University electricity, magnetism, galvanism, physiognomy,
of Munich as well as a theosopher, understands phrenology, meteorology, mineralogy, and philo-
Nature as the organ and sensible symbol of Divin- sophical anatomy. None of these sub-disciplines
ity; Novalis, in his professional life an inspector in are independent; a scientific fact is a sign, and
the directorate of salt mines of Saxony, sees each because signs correspond, concepts borrowed from
being and each object in Nature as illuminated by chemistry, for example, may be transposed into
the transcendent light of the divine truth, and astronomy or psychology.
thereby transformed into a sanctuary for a believ- Naturphilosophie is directly linked to the holis-
ing soul. The sciences, he confided to August Wil- tic and organicistic living Nature of esotericism.
helm Schlegel, must be poeticized. Because the The Romantics recognized in Hermetic types of
signification of Nature lies outside itself, empirical Naturphilosophie, which opposed acausal corre-
observation is only a necessary point of departure. spondences to the mechanistic causality of the
Nature must be deciphered by means of correspon- emerging scientific revolution, a viable counter-
dences; that is, authentic knowledge of Nature as metaphysic to contemporary mechanism, dualism,
the invisible processes of Spirit is possible only by and materialism. Representatives of Naturphiloso-
means of analogy. Romantic Naturphilosophen phie most attached to esotericism include A.K.A.
criticized the objective sciences as being restricted Eschenmayer, > Novalis, > J.W. Ritter, > G.H.
to the surface of things and for conceiving of von Schubert, and C.G. Carus.

--- Page 430 ---
ROMANTICISM 1006
8. ROMANTICISM AND ESOTERICISM value of every human being in a constantly chang-
Scholars who have traced the connections ing cosmos. What unites Romantics — and provides
between the western esoteric tradition and Roman- whatever coherence the term “Romanticism” pos-
ticism offer numerous metaphors for the relation- sesses — is that individual Romantics were all
ship between them: a complicity formed between responding to the same historical situation, albeit
the Baroque imaginary and the Romantic frame with national variations, and were subject to the
of mind; the Romantics found nourishment in same historical constraints.
Boehmenist theosophy; the relationship between The Romantics found in the Western esoteric
esotericism and Romanticism is a confluence, tradition ideas that answered to the intellectual
rather than an influence; the relationship is one of and spiritual problems of their own historical
analogy, not of cause and effect; Romanticism drew moment. Their relationship to that tradition is not
on esotericism as an ally in its battle against the that of the heir or disciple who piously preserves
Enlightenment; Romanticism is the revival of the what is handed down or recites unchanged the
esoteric tradition, though a revival with a differ- master’s teaching. The Romantics used esoteric
ence; Romanticism reformulated the esoteric tradi- ideas in order to, and to the extent that they helped,
tion. Each of these metaphors — of complicity, resolve the problems posed for them by their own
nourishment, confluence, analogy, alliance, revival, historical situation. Esoteric ideas are only part,
reformulation — makes a claim about the relation- though an important part, of Romanticism. More-
ship of Romanticism to the esoteric tradition. A over, while, for example, much Romantic poetry, as
historical explanation, rather than extrapolating the decoding of the presence of Divinity in the
from some essentialist definition of Romanticism, beings and things of the natural world, is linked to
is required in order to adjudicate these claims, and esotericism, the fact that this link is weak or non-
thereby to decide whether or not the extensive con- existent for the English poets (for most of whom
nections between the Western esoteric tradition Oxbridge platonism served in its place) suggests
and specific Romantic thinkers warrant the claim that Romantic poetics does not require an esoteric
that esotericism is an essential, constitutive factor inspiration, however much it may actually have
in Romanticism. had one in Germany and France.
We must begin with the fact that Boehme, for The esoteric tradition experienced a second
example, lived and thought as a man of the 17th Golden Age from the late 18th century until the
century, and not of the rgth century. His theosophy mid-rgoth century — the period of > Illuminism.
responded to a set of religious, philosophical, Sects promising spiritual regeneration, which had
social, etc. problems posed to him by his time, his flourished as an underground movement during
place, and his environment. The thought of other the Enlightenment, were now in harmony with
pre-Enlightenment representatives of the esoteric events and spirits. Swedenborgian New Christian-
tradition connected to Romanticism is similarly ity, Boehmenist theosophy, Martinesism and >
historically specific. For their part, the Roman- Martinism, Pythagoreanism, and > Magnetism all
tics themselves belonged to a unique historical spread during the early years of the roth century.
moment: post-Enlightenment, post-French Revo- Illuminism, as well as Romanticism, occupied the
lutionary, marked by the upheavals of the indus- mental space opened up by the French Revolution.
trial revolution (fully in Britain, increasingly in Saint-Martin to an extent, and Fabre d’Olivet and
France, only slightly in Germany); an age of social Baader completely, are Illuminists responding to
and intellectual disintegration, crisis, and renewal; the same historical situation as the Romantics. The
of the crumbling of old religious certainties and difference between Illuminism and Romanticism,
a massive expansion of human knowledge. The aside from the fact that Romanticism draws on
brutal end of the ancien régime in the French Rev- many other sources besides esoteric traditions, is
olution opened up a mental space that came to be that Illuminists give unique authority to the eso-
occupied by Romanticism. Ideas in the air before teric tradition, whereas Romantics test esoteric
1789, but incompatible with rationalism and texts, like all other authorities, against their own
empiricism, crystallized into a set of alternatives subjective experience. Illuminism complicates the
to Enlightenment attitudes toward art, thought, historical relationship between Romanticism and
belief, and life: the primacy of the imagination, the the esoteric tradition; it is both an inspiration of
potencies of intuition, the importance of the emo- Romanticism and a parallel movement to it. Illu-
tions and emotional integrity, a living Nature, the minists like Fabre d’Olivet and Baader reinter-
value of interior spirituality, independent of con- preted esoteric themes and ideas in light of the
fessional frameworks, and the uniqueness and historical situation of the early 19th century,

--- Page 431 ---
1007 ROQUETAILLADE
thereby making them more accessible to, and more Gnosis and Hermeticsm from Antiquity to Modern
useful for, the Romantics. Complicating matters Times, Albany: State University of New York Press,
even further, Romanticism itself influenced the eso- 1998, 237-268 Herbert J. Hunt, The Epic in Nine-
teric tradition. The prime example is temporalism. teenth-Century France, Oxford: Blackwell, 1941 ¢
Brian Juden, Traditions orphiques et tendances mys-
The historical consciousness of the Romantics is
tiques dan le romantisme frang¢ais (1800-1855), Paris:
alien to esotericism as it had developed hitherto; Klincksieck, 1971 # Arthur McCalla, A Romantic
“process”, for theosophical, alchemical, mystical, Historiosophy: The Philosophy of History of Pierre-
and Neoplatonic traditions, unfolds outside of Simon Ballanche, Leiden, Boston & Koln: E.J. Brill,
time. Once Romanticism had inculcated into West- 1998 @ Jos van Meurs, “William Blake and His Gnos-
tic Myths”, in: van den Broek & Hanegraaff, Gnosisern culture a historical consciousness, “process”
and Hermeticism, 269-309 # Jacques Roos, Aspects
and “transmutation” began to be interpreted,
littéraires du mysticisme philosophique et Vinfluence
within esoteric traditions themselves, in terms of de Boehme et de Swedenborg au début de romantisme:
evolution. William Blake, Novalis, Ballanche, Strasbourg: P.H.
The relationship between Romanticism and the Heitz, 1951 # Eugene Susini, Franz von Baader et le
western esoteric tradition is therefore a complex Romantisme mystique, 2 vols., Paris: J. Vrin, 1942
one rooted in the historical situation of the late- Ernest Lee Tuveson, The Avatars of Thrice Great
Hermes: An Approach to Romanticism, Lewisburg:18th and early-r9th century. Esoteric ideas were
Bucknell University Press, 1982 ¢ Auguste Viatte,
important, even central, to certain aspects of
Les Sources occultes du romantisme, 2 vols., Paris:
Romanticism, but much less so to others — more so Champion, 1928.
for epistemology and poetics than for philosophy
of history; more so in Germany and France than in ARTHUR MCCALLA
Britain. The Western esoteric tradition contributed
importantly to the thought of many individual Roquetaillade, Jean de (Johannes de
Romantics, but was not an essential, constitutive Rupescissa), * ca. 1310 Marcolés
factor in Romanticism.
(south of Aurillac), t after 1365 place
M.H. Abrams, Natural Supernaturalism: Tradition unknown
and Revolution in Romantic Literature, New York:
Norton, 1971 # Annie Becq, “Les traditions ésoté- Roquetaillade took the habit of the Brothers
riques en France de la Révolution 4 la Restauration”, Minor in 1332 after studies pursued for five years
in: Manuel d’histoire littéraire de la France, Paris: Edi- in Toulouse, and continued his studies as a Francis-
tions sociales, 1971, vol. 4, 272-301 ¢ Paul Bénichou, can until 1337-1338. He would later judge these
Le Sacre de l’écrivain, 1750-1830, Paris: J. Corti, 2nd
youthful years to have been wasted in ‘vain dispu-
edition, 1985 ¢ Ernst Benz, Les Sources mystiques de la
tations and a great din of useless words’. Jean very philosophie romantique allemande, Paris: Vrin, 1987 ¢
Frank Paul Bowman, “Illuminism, Utopia, Mythol- soon espoused the cause of the “Spiritual” Francis-
ogy”, in: D.G. Charlton (ed.), The French Romantics, cans whose principal doctrines related to the teach-
2 vols., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984, ing of Pierre Dejean Olieu (¢ 1298). In 1332, a
vol. 1, 76-112 @ idem, “The Theory of Harmonies”, in: vision in a dream informed him of the birth of an
French Romanticism: Intertextual and Interdisciplinary oriental antichrist in a place called Zaycon, about
Readings, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
which he knew nothing at all. Paying no attention
1990 # Léon Cellier, Fabre d’Olivet: Contribution a
létude des aspects religieux du romantisme, Paris: to the vision at first, he literally fell into “ecstasy”
Nizet, 1953 ¢@ idem, L’Epopée romantique, Paris: (fui subito quasi in extasem conversus) three years
Presses Universitaires de France, 1954 ¢ idem, Par- later when, reading letters sent by a brother resid-
cours Initiatiques, Neuchatel: A la Baconniére; Greno- ing in China, he discovered that the Minor always
ble: Presses universitaires de Grenoble, 1977 Antoine finished his letters with the name “bishop of Zay-
Faivre, Eckhartshausen et la théosophie chrétienne, con”. Jean de Roquetaillade was henceforth per-
Paris: Klincksieck 1969 # idem, Philosophie de la
suaded that God was signifying to him that he had
Nature: Physique sacrée et théosophie XVIII°-XIX°
siecle, Paris: Albin Michel, 1996 ¢ Antoine Faivre & to proclaim to the world the apparitions and reve-
Rolf Christian Zimmerman (eds.), Epochen der Natur- lations that were granted to him. Heaven favoured
mystik: Hermetische Tradition im wissenschaftlichen him with illuminations so generously that his main
Fortschritt, Berlin: E. Schmidt 1979 ¢ Georges Gus- works, which are prophetic and alchemical, often
dorf, Fondements du savoir romantique, Paris: Payot, have a vision as a starting point. Like Olieu and >
1982 @ idem, Du Néant a Dieu dans le savoir roman-
Arnau de Vilanova, Jean de Roquetaillade lived
tique, Paris: Payot, 1983 ¢ idem, L’Homme roman-
in expectation of the Antichrist, of whom he
tique, Paris: Payot, 1984 ¢ Wouter J. Hanegraaff,
“Romanticism and the Esoteric Connection”, in: identified several avatars. He adopted the modus
Roelof van den Broek & Wouter J. Hanegraaff (eds.), vivendi of the “Spirituals” and preached the

--- Page 432 ---
ROQUETAILLADE 1008
evangelical poverty that the Franciscans of strict marked by a difficult syntax, but in fact, such was
observance associated with the spirit of prophecy. the law of the genre. This style in an expression of
Expressed without caution by a violent and intran- the sense of mental crisis typical of those who expe-
sigent character, in an era when concessions to rienced the end of the Middle Ages. Besides the
Franciscan demands were no longer considered works already listed, mention must also be made of
opportune, his imprecations, warnings and denun- the Veh mundo in centum annis (or the De oneribus
ciations of a Church wallowing in luxury cost him orbis) in which, among others, the author attacks
imprisonment from 1344 on. This was the begin- the “sons of Aristotle”, the ninth scourge, and the
ning of a long period of hardship, with internments Liber ostensor.
in various places (Figeac, Cahors, Rieux, Avignon, Jean de Roquetaillade was renowned not only
etc.). These confinements obviously did not pre- for his visions and predictions, but owes part of his
vent him from writing down his predictions and fame to his books treating of > alchemy. Here
visions, or from engaging in alchemical experi- again, he is considered a disciple of master Arnau
ments. Inspired by the apocryphal works of de Vilanova. In De consideratione quintae essen-
Joachim of Fiore, the writings of Robert d’Uzés, tiae rerum omnium or De quinta essentia, a text of
pseudo-Cyril (cf. his Commentaire sur l’Oracle du medical chemistry, Jean de Roquetaillade identifies
Bienheureux Cyrille), ~ Hildegard of Bingen, the the fifth element, Aristotle’s ether, as alcohol and
books of Daniel and Ezekiel, and the Apocalypse of the elixir of the alchemists. In the prologue to this
John, Jean de Roquetaillade belongs to the work, he clearly states that the goal of philosophy
Joachimite vein, integrating the contributions of is not to lose one’s time in sterile disputes but,
Olieu and of Arnau de Vilanova with the concepts rather, that it consists in providing evangelical men
of Joachim of Fiore. One of the great originalities with an admirable medicine that revives their
of Roquetaillade is (in his Liber Secretorum Even- health and vigor. Jean says of his quintessence that
tum) to proclaim a literal millenarianism that pos- it has the power to cure the plagues that occur
tulates 1000 solar years between the death of the through the evil influence of the stars, but not those
great Antichrist and the Last Judgment; then, he sent by God. Another alchemical book by Jean de
writes, ‘the fullness of the Holy Spirit will descend Roquetaillade is Liber lucis. There Jean connects
over the whole earth’ and men will joyfully his revelation of the mystery of the philosopher’s
embrace the lifestyle of the poor Franciscans. He is stone to his predictions about the Antichrist. If he
considered to have been the first to break away so does not respect the obligation, so dear to the
clearly from the Augustinian dogma prohibiting adepts, of keeping the secret, this is because men of
any millenarianism. He predicts the coming to this the gospel are in need of the stone in order to help
world below of prophets who will completely the unfortunate who are being persecuted by the
understand ‘the secrets and hidden mysteries of sect of the Antichrist. This treatise repeatedly
Scripture’. In the image of an Arnau de Vilanova quotes the Tractatus parabolicus by Arnau de
and of many Joachimites, he thought in fact that Vilanova, which compares the alchemical regimen
the full extent of the Biblical message had not yet with Christ’s passion.
been revealed, and that only certain chosen and The paradox of an uncommon character like
well-informed individuals were qualified to bring Jean de Roquetaillade is that, despite beliefs and
the enigmas of the Book into the open. Jean’s convictions that may well seem fantastical (he
ambition was to conjecture future events. On announced, for example, the physical destruction
several occasions he flatters himself with having of terrestrial animals by enormous earthworms!),
seen correctly; for example, in announcing the he displays so much sound scientific knowledge in
capture of King Jean le Bon (in Vade mecum in his alchemical works that he must be considered
tribulatione). However, his self-appointed mission one of the distant precursors of iatrochemistry. In
of bringing current political events in accord with addition, it is certainly his total independence with
his discourse on the “last things” forced him to regard to the philosophical dogmas issued from
make certain adjustments from one work to the Aristotle, that made it possible for him to develop
other. Situating himself in the purest tradition of his theory of distilled alcohol as the earthly equiv-
oracles and prophecies, Jean multiplied the num- alent of the fifth element, the matter of the celestial
ber of symbolic figures and metaphors (bat, fox, bodies. It is no less surprising that Jean de Roque-
donkeys, eagle, bear, etc.) to the interpretation of taillade, a man brimming with visions and an
which he delivered the keys. One may be sur- obscure interpreter of the hidden mysteries of the
prised at the ‘esoteric language’ (Bignami-Odier) of Scriptures and oracles, was obsessed by numbers
these prophecies, composed of enigmatic sentences and calculations to such an extent as predicting

--- Page 433 ---
1009 ROSICRUCIANISM I: FIRST HALF OF THE 17TH CENTURY
‘future events with a greater certainty than through mysterious writings in the alchemical tradition [>
miracles and wonders’. Alchemy], in Paracelsian pansophy [> Paracel-
sianism], or in the Hermetic currents of the Re-
Vademecum in tribulatione, Appendix ad fasciculum naissance [-» Hermetic Literature III], while others
rerum expetendarum et fugiendarum (Edward Brown, believed that they could identify the source in
ed.), London, 1690, 496-508 (Arizona: reprinted Tuc-
Brahmanism or even in -> Moses.
son, 1967) ¢ Lettres, in: idem, 494-496 ¢ Liber Secre-
The considerable success of the first Rosicrucian torum Eventum (Robert E. Lerner & Christine
Morerod-Fattebert, eds.), Fribourg: Editions Universi- writings is certainly due in part to their literary
taires, 1994. quality and to the mystery which surrounded
them. But in addition to that, what they contained
Lit.: Jeanne Bignami-Odier, Etudes sur Jean de Roque- also put forward solutions to the problems of
taillade (Jean de Rupescissa), Paris, 1952 repr. in: His-
the time and of the generations to come, within
toire Littéraire de la France 41 (1981), 75-240) ¢
the context of what the present author has called Robert Halleux, “Les écrits alchimiques de Jean de
Rupescissa”, in: Histoire Littéraire de la France 41 (borrowing Paul Hazard’s expression) “the crisis
(1981), 241-277. of European consciousness in the 17th century”.
That crisis took on three forms: in politics, religion
ANTOINE CALVET and epistemology. The Holy Empire was subject to
strong tensions which the Peace of Augsburg and
Rosicrucianism I: First half of the the principle cuius regio, eius religio had not been
17th Century able to alleviate. The so-called “Formula of con-
cord” had not succeeded in reinstating the unity
The phenomenon known as “Rosicrucianism” between the various Lutheran States. Calvinism
has its origin in 1614, with a volume that appeared was gaining ground, and the Roman Catholic
in Kassel, Germany, containing three texts: Allge- Church had become reinforced since the Council
meine und General Reformation der gantzen of Trent. As a consequence, Lutheran authorities
weiten Welt (Universal and General Reformation drew tougher doctrinal lines. On the other hand,
of the Whole Wide World), Fama Fraternitatis, the new scientific orientation had been rapidly
Def Loblichen Ordens des Rosenkreutzes, an alle expanding, as exemplified by the mathematician
Gelehrte und Hadupter Europae geschrieben (The Ieronymus Cardanus, the geographer Mercator,
Fame of the Fraternity of the Praiseworthy Order and primarily the astronomer Johannes Kepler (the
of the Rose-Cross, Written to all the Learned and influence of the latter on the Rosicrucian writings is
Rulers of Europe), and Auch einer kurtzen Respon- indisputable).
sion (Also a Short Reponse) signed by > Adam The manifestoes originated in the “Learned
Haslmayr. In a new edition, published in 1615, the and Christian Society” established by > Johann
first item, a satirical extract translated from Tra- Valentin Andreae in Tiibingen in 1610. This small
iano Boccalini’s Ragguagli di Parnaso (News from group of bosom friends of Andreae’s, notably
Parnassus), disappeared in favor of the Confessio Christoph Besold and Tobias Hess (his amici
Fraternitatis (Confession of the Fraternity). The secretissimi), together conceived of and con-
Fama was an undoubted success, for it was structed the Rosicrucian myth. In all likelihood the
reprinted nine times through 1616, in which year Fama Fraternitatis and the Confessio resulted from
a story entitled Chymische Hochzeit Christiani the cooperation of several authors, whereas the
Rosenkreutz Anno 1459 (The Chemical Wedding Chemical Wedding was written by Andreae alone.
of Christian Rosenkreuz in the Year 1459) Against the background of the crisis referred to
appeared in Strasbourg. From the moment of above, the members of the Tiibingen circle felt that
their appearance, the two early manifestoes and it was necessary to return to the practice of Chris-
the novel the Chemical Wedding enjoyed a tian piety, aloof from the dogmatic squabbles of
warm reception over the whole of Europe. In orthodoxy, and reconcile it with the advancement
Germany, France, and England, these modest of science and learning.
writings unleashed an avalanche of reactions pro The Fama, the Confessio, and the Chemical
and contra: more than 200 polemics or panegyrics Wedding reflected a worldview based upon an
appeared between 1614 and 1620, and some 900 analogical apprehension of God and of the world
up to the beginning of the 18th century. Some on the part of man, based upon earlier esoteric
accused the authors of the Rosicrucian manifestoes sources and traditions in Western esotericism. The
of heresy, political agitation, or diabolic pacts. rose in this context reveals symbolic attributes
Others, more objective, sought the genesis of these similar to those of the lotus in the Far East. It

--- Page 434 ---
ROSICRUCIANISM I: FIRST HALF OF THE 17TH CENTURY IOIO
unfolds on the surface of the Earth-Mother, while died in 1484, and his mausoleum not discovered
the mystic rose is an attribute of the Mater Dei until 1604, whereas Paracelsus was born in 1493
(Mother of God) and of spiritualized matter. and died in 1541. The implausible chronology only
According to the Zohar, the rose is the symbol of goes to underline paradoxically the relationship of
God’s presence in the world, which will bloom ideas between the Rosicrucians and Paracelsus.
again in messianic times. Medieval iconography The latter’s ideas about the Astrum, the world-soul
made its blossom the image of the Grail [> Grail which manifests through the macrocosm; on the
Traditions in Western Esotericism], the vessel Liber Mundi (Book of the World) whose hiero-
in which Christ’s blood was collected, and thus glyphs are there to be deciphered; on the invisible
saw this flower as a symbol of regeneration. In half of the cosmos whose secrets man is able to dis-
the Paradiso of his Divine Comedy, > Dante sees cover because he is the microcosm and the temple
‘the eternal rose opening stepwise’ in which the of God; on the notion of cosmic time in which the
Blessed live. Traditionally, the rose is also the recep- alchemist may intervene as midwife to nature and
tacle of the fertilizing dew, symbol of the redemp- co-operator with God; on the capacity of the
tive divine grace. The prophet Hosea has Jahweh human soul to command the stars, to control
say: ‘I will be as the dew to Israel; he shall blossom events, and even to produce new beings that the
as the lily’ (Hos. 14:5/6), while Isaiah speaks of a Anima Mundi “imagines”; and finally his belief in
‘dew of light’ that will restore life to the dead (Is. “elementary” beings, i.e., those that live in the ele-
26:19). The similarity of the Latin words rosa ments, the ‘nymphs, sylphs, pygmies, salamanders,
(rose) and ros (dew) has led some to see in the Rose- and other spirits’: all these ideas of Paracelsus recur
Cross the alliance of the dew and the cross. in the Fama Fraternitatis. His rich and powerful
If the rose is the point of juncture and flowering writings, which were not really accessible until
between matter and the divinity, it is normal for it Huser’s edition appeared in Basel in 1591, have
to be situated symbolically at the center of the cross every appearance of proclaiming him a prophet of
that unites heaven and earth. > John Dee, in his the new era.
Monas hieroglyphica (Hieroglyphic Monad), had Another influence is that of De arte cabalistica
argued that the cross is ternary (consisting of two (On the Kabbalistic Art), published by > Johannes
straight lines plus their meeting-point), represent- Reuchlin in 1517. This contains an account of the
ing the Holy Trinity and the trinity of body, soul, symbolic meeting between a Pythagorean, a Mus-
and spirit; that it is quaternary, thus terrestrial; and lim, and a Jewish Kabbalist. While the Fama is
that it is also quinary, the number five evoking the as little sympathetic towards Mohammed as it is
sacred marriage of spirit and matter. Thus it is no to the Pope, it praises kabbalah and emphasizes
surprise that the two symbols should be allied in the musical and philosophical harmony existing
heraldry, notably in the coats of arms of Luther and between man, heaven, and earth, symbolized by
of the family of Johann Valentin Andreae, in the the geometrical perfection of the sphere. As for
Order of the Garter, founded circa 1348, or in the Christian Rosenkreuz, through his Axiomata he is
collar of the Annunziata, a chivalric order founded said to have penetrated the secrets of divine math-
in 1363 by Amadeo VI, Duke of Savoy. These two ematics; thanks to his knowledge of the Rotae
motifs already appear united in the frescoes and Mundi (wheels of the world), he is the universal
mosaics of primitive Christianity, and in the work man, the axis of the cycles of renovation; and the
of the German mystic Heinrich Suso (1295-1366). book entitled Proteus, said to be in the library of
> Paracelsus, in his Liber de resurrectione et cor- the first Rosicrucians, evokes the theme of meta-
porum glorificatione (Book of the Resurrection morphosis. Thus one can understand the Fama’s
and Glorification of Bodies, circa 1533), explains affirmation that there is no contradiction between
that man, regenerated by the Cross, thereafter philosophy and theology.
receives a spiritual body whose glorification is The Fama is not exclusively dogmatic. It also
symbolized by the rose; it is Christ, the Man-God, recounts the history of Christian Rosenkreuz:
who transfigures us, just as the philosophers’ stone his initiatic journey to the Orient, to Egypt and
transmutes metallic matter. It is not surprising, Morocco, the constitution of the Order of the
therefore, that the Fama Fraternitatis mentions the Rose-Cross, the writing of their ‘secret and
name of Paracelsus with respect and admiration, revealed philosophy’ which is a gnosis, and the
nor that it depicts works relating to this author as miracles that they work thanks to their cosmo-
being present in the vault where the body of Chris- sophy, which is a pansophy, a natural > magic, a
tian Rosenkreuz rests. The founder of the Rosicru- spiritualization of matter, by means of which all
cians, as explained in the Fama, is supposed to have things are ordered towards divinity. The Rosicru-

--- Page 435 ---
IOIIL ROSICRUCIANISM I: FIRST HALF OF THE 17TH CENTURY
cians’ wisdom is said to be “revealed” because it is rath. Hermes is the messenger and the spokesman
not the result of rational thought, and because it of Zeus, the “angel” (Gk. aggelos = messenger) of
is simultaneously knowledge and procreation. It Olympus, the herald of good news. Thus it is nor-
is presented as an interior vision, a divine gift medi- mal for astrologers to regard Mercury as ‘the lord
ated through the mundus imaginalis (imaginal of the word’, and for the Confessio Fraternitatis
world; the term derives from ~ Henry Corbin), to proclaim the coming of ‘the age of the Tongue’.
which is the reason that the Fama mentions ‘the > Jacob Boehme, in his Morgen-Rothe im Auff-
office of angels and spirits’ and evokes the elemen- gangk (Rising Dawn, 1612), wrote that in the man
tary beings as intermediaries. Finally, theirs is a who is fulfilled, the planet Mercury gives rise to an
secret philosophy, i.e., one that is connected with inspired language. Possessed by the divine virtues,
the mysteries of the > correspondences between he becomes the singer of the Word, in communion
microcosm and macrocosm, which only reveal with the angels (Aurora, 5, 11-13). In the same
themselves through masks, in a symbolic ambiva- way, the Confessio states that the time has come to
lence accessible solely through initiation. This phi- speak, to reveal the mysteries of the Adamic lan-
losophy belongs within a tradition whose initiates guage, i.e. the primordial idiom, transparent as
are named in the Fama: Adam, Enoch, Abraham, light, which the animals in Paradise understood
Moses, Solomon, Plato, Aristotle, and Pythagoras. and which allowed Enoch to converse with angels.
One can see that this “philosophy” which encom- Because the Rosicrucians already possess the
passes Hermetism and > alchemy is really the knowledge of this language, they claim to be able
philosophia perennis [> Tradition]: it is perennial to go beyond the exoteric meaning of the Bible and
because it has been perpetuated since the origins of give it a spiritual reading, so as to discover that the
mankind, and it is eclectic because it conciliates the Holy Scriptures are the quintessence of the entire
divine revelation and its cosmic manifestations in a world, and so as to decipher the characters of the
higher unity. Without any syncretism, it recognizes liber Naturae. But they make it plain that the book
the equal value of the Divinity’s two forms of of nature cannot be read and understood except by
expression, Nature and Scripture (‘the great Book a minority. They proclaim ‘the age of the tongue’,
of marvels is in concord with the Bible’). but they impose the law of silence on whoever ral-
Christian Rosenkreuz is said to have died in lies to them. If > secrecy is a fundamental element
1484, at the age of 106. In terms of traditional > in the Confessio Fraternitatis, which mentions it
number symbolism the number roo evokes indi- at least ten times, it is not for the sake of kindling
viduation, while the addition of 1 and 6 gives the the readers’ curiosity, but because certain realities
well-known symbolic number of 7. Likewise the touching on religion, creation, and the book of
date of 1484 reduces to a total of 17, which could nature are held to be inaccessible without a long
be interpreted as the ogdoad (1+7) or, according to initiation and an alignment of the psyche with the
a Pythagorean and Shi’ite tradition, the number of divine and cosmic mysteries. Secrecy is a condi-
those who will be resurrected. Thus number sym- tion of the sacred. Hermes Trismegistus says to
bolism confirms the particular election of Christian Asclepius: ‘It is an impious thing to divulge to the
Rosenkreuz. The Confessio Fraternitatis, as its masses a teaching filled with the divine majesty’,
appearance was announced in the Fama, was to and the epigraph of the Chemical Wedding recails
contain 37 reasons for making the Brotherhood that pearls should not be cast before swine. The
public. Although the reasons are not in fact enu- Rosicrucians’ secret is the possession of the gnosis
merated in the Confessio, the symbolism of this that the Corpus Hermeticum defines as a gift from
number is also obvious: 3+7 gives the number of God. And the ‘true philosophy’ that the Confessio
the Pythagorean tetraktys in which the source and extols is Hermetist; the reference to the theological
root of eternal Nature is to be found, while their and medical sources of this “philosophy” reflect
multiplication gives 21, which in the Bible is the its Paracelsian origin. In the Liber Paragranum,
number of attributes of Wisdom. Paracelsus had mentioned as the four foundations
The authors of the Confessio Fraternitatis agree of his medicine ‘philosophy, astronomy, alchemy,
with the astrologers that their epoch is entering and virtue’, and he had stated that ‘The philoso-
into the sign of Mercury, who was assimilated by pher should find nothing in heaven or earth that he
~ Michael Maier with Hermes | Hermes Trisme- cannot equally find in man. The physician should
gistus]. In his Choephoroi, Aeschylus has Electra only find in man that which heaven and earth
define Hermes as the mediator par excellence contain’.
between gods and men, a function also ascribed to Paracelsus’ optimism sometimes gives his writ-
him by the alchemists and by > Heinrich Khun- ings a prophetic tone. According to the treatise

--- Page 436 ---
ROSICRUCIANISM I: FIRST HALF OF THE 17TH CENTURY IoI2
De Mineralibus, there is nothing hidden that shall Philosophorum (Dawn of the Philosophers) of
not be revealed; the author announces the coming ‘rose-colored blood’ in which is hidden the soul of
of a man who will possess wisdom and be able to the philosophers’ stone, and cites this prediction
unveil all. This same prophetic atmosphere per- of the alchemists: ‘The last times will see the com-
vades the Confessio Fraternitatis, but it also stems ing to the earth and the world of a man who is
from Joachim of Fiore, whose principal writings absolutely pure, which will permit the redemption
had been printed at the time of the Reformation. of the world. Thanks to the drops of rose-colored
Joachim’s reflections on the profound meaning of blood that he will shed, he will wash away the sin
Scripture had led him to discern in the creation of the world, he will purify it and purge it of all
three successive ages: the age of nettles, the age of its uncleanness’. Further on, Dorn concludes: ‘In
roses, and the age of lilies. The tertius status (third the end...the matter of our philosophic stone
stage) will be that of the eternal Gospel, in which, is nothing other than the true hermaphroditic
thanks to a new “spiritual” religion, we will see the Adam, the microcosm... It is the case that our
heavens open. This third age was to begin at the mercury .. . acquires the energy and power of the
end of the sixth millennium, when the “sixth seal” higher and lower things, whose nuptial union, so to
would be broken and the “sixth candlestick” be lit. speak, it realizes’.
The Confessio Fraternitatis similarly situates itself The Rosicrucian romance of the Chemical
at the end of the ‘age of the rose’ and evokes the Wedding, to whose authorship Johann Valentin
privilege granted to the Rosicrucian Brotherhood Andreae eventually admitted, describes the coming
to light the ‘sixth candlestick’, thus inaugurating an of a ‘perfectly pure’ man, putissimus homo, who
era of happiness, health, and prosperity. Paracelsus appears on the earth in postremis temporibus (in
saw this time of the Holy Spirit already at work in the last times). Evidently this providential being is
the microcosm and macrocosm; according to him, not to be confused with Christ, whose redemptive
there is a light in nature whose brightness surpasses sacrifice saved humanity once and for all and freed
that of the sun, and in this light invisible things it from the tragic burden of original sin. Nor is the
become visible, ubiquity becomes possible, and putissimus homo the salvator microcosmi, the sav-
the future is unveiled. The Confessio alludes to the ior of the microcosm that is man, but rather the ser-
pseudo-Paracelsian prophecy of the Lion of the vator cosmi, i.e., the liberator of the world, the
North, taken up by Haslmayr in his Responsion to total man, he who will complete the redemptive
the Brothers of the Rose-Cross that was bound work of Christ by practicing “deliverance” in the
with the first edition of the Fama. The action of the sense of the Greek word “maieutic”; that is to say,
Rosicrucians prepares for the advent of the Lion, the birthing of nature which Paul says in the Epis-
whose universal monarchy will inaugurate an era tle to the Romans ‘has been groaning in travail up
of felicity. But the prophecy goes on to say that this to now’ and ‘waits with eager longing for the
golden age presupposes a transmutation that is revealing of the sons of God’ (Rom. 8.22, 19). This
symbolically described in the Chemical Wedding of glorification of Nature which is to achieve the work
Christian Rosenkreuz. of redemption is interpreted as an alchemical opus:
This narrative is placed in obscure fashion under it is the Great Work, the effect of the double mys-
the patronage of the Aurora consurgens (Dawn tery of regeneration and of the hieros gamos, hence
Rising), a mysterious text of the rsth century that the sacred marriage. Regeneration and hierogamy
describes the chemical and spiritual marriage on are understood as two salvific actions due to the
a new earth; and also under that of Paracelsus, intervention of Hermes, or more precisely of the
whose name is mentioned in a cryptogram. In his spiritus Mercurius, the Spirit Mercury. As for
Liber de resurrectione et corporum glorificatione, the mission of the servator mundi, the liberator of
Paracelsus writes that ‘the proofs of authenticity of the world, at the end of the Chemical Wedding of
natural gold give us an image of the trials that our Christian Rosenkreuz it is granted to the “Knights
regenerated body must undergo . . . Thus, after the of the Golden Stone”.
resurrection, a new body is born which, being more The strange symbol drawn on the invitation
luminous than the sun, is called the transfigured to the royal wedding that an angel brings to Chris-
body’. The resurrection of Christ is an image of our tian Rosenkreuz is in fact an ideogram that was
own: ‘by him and in him we will arise like the rose commented upon in the Hieroglyphic Monad of
and its proud blossoms from the same seed and the John Dee (1564), and symbolizes the sacred mar-
same stem’. > Gérard Dorn, whose writings had riage between the material and the spiritual. It
surely been read by Andreae, speaks in a Latin evokes the image of a mysterious personage, the
work of the end of the 16th century called Aurora protagonist of this hierogamy, who manifests at

--- Page 437 ---
1013 ROSICRUCIANISM I: FIRST HALF OF THE 17TH CENTURY
certain moments in the sight of mortals. Christian time show, it is the medicina catholica (catholic
Rosenkreuz in fact says that he comes back period- medicine), i.e., the panacea; the salvator omnium
ically to guide mankind. imperfectorum corporum (that which cures all
In this brief presentation of early Rosicrucianism imperfect bodies); and the aqua vitae (water of
it is impossible to expound in detail the multiple life). The aqua permanens is simultaneously water,
symbolic elements of the Chemical Wedding. It fire, air, and golden tincture. It is the baptismal
must suffice to indicate and decipher the principal element from which emerges the second Adam,
stages of initiation of the novel’s eponymous hero. the philosophic man. On Friday, dies veneris (the
When he arrives at the castle of the Wedding, he is day of Venus), Christian Rosenkreuz discovers in
met by a fierce lion, which is later found perched on the subterranean caverns the Arbor philosophica
a fountain and holding in its paws a naked sword, (philosophic tree) whose branches are like the veins
which it breaks before throwing the pieces into the of the earth whose coagulated blood becomes the
fountain and giving a roar. A dove then brings the metals, especially gold. Venus, whom he beholds
lion an olive branch, which it swallows. A white naked, is the matrix from which its roots draw their
unicorn that had come to kneel before it thereupon sap, and her fecundity will permit the realization of
shows extreme joy. The lion symbolizes among the Great Work. The elect, marked by the sign of
other things the spiritus Mercurius, as does the uni- the Golden Fleece and led by Hermes the psy-
corn. It is appeased by the reverence of the unicorn, chopomp, proceed on their journey which brings
which represents the active purity, the fecundating them to the Tower of Olympus. For the Mercury of
sword, the penetrating force of the Spirit Mercury. the philosophers is the actor of all the metamor-
The white dove, messenger of peace, may also be a phoses that take place, and which are directed by
symbol of the philosophical mercury, this time in its the Virgin Alchemy, herself one of the aspects of the
volatile form, corresponding to the Holy Spirit in spiritus mercurialis. In a treatise dating from the
the Bible. The water of divine grace is here gathered 15th century and attributed to > Marsilio Ficino,
in the mercurial fountain. It is what the alchemists it is stated that Mercury, like the Virgin Mary to
call aqua permanens (permanent water), whose which he is assimilated, has given birth to the philo-
virtue is to transform the body into spirit and con- sophic stone. He carries it in his belly, and when the
fer indestructibility upon it. This mercurial water time is ripe he gives birth to the Filius macrocosmi
is the primordial water, of which a 17th century (son of the macrocosm), by whose blood inferior
Hermetist author said that it is born from the bodies are “tinctured” and gathered, cured, into
divine light and that the quintessence is its issue. the Golden Heaven. This transmutation, in which
Just as a spiritual spring once sprung forth sym- Rosenkreuz is invited to participate in the Tower of
bolically in Judea, for the alchemists there is a mys- Olympus, was evoked by Poimandres in the first
terious Judea in a place kept secret, with a spring tractate of the Corpus Hermeticum [trans. Copen-
whose’ water comes from the lumen naturae haver]: ‘First, in releasing the material body you
(light of nature). On the following day, Christian give the body itself over to alteration, and the form
Rosenkreuzis again brought to the fountain; the that you used to have vanishes. To the demon you
lion holdsetween its claws a plaque announcing give over your temperament, now inactive. The
the metamorphosis of Hermes, ‘turned to a healing body’s senses rise up and flow back to their par-
medicine’, and invited to drink and purify himself. ticular sources... and mingling again with the
The enigma of this transformation makes sense in [astral] energies... Thence the human_ being
the context of Hermetism. The alchemists say of rushes up through the cosmic framework’, which
the Mercury of the philosophers that it is versatile is sevenfold, and comes denuded of his vices to
and rejoices equally in the company of the good the ‘ogdoadic nature’. This corresponds to the
and the bad. But it is precisely this changing humor eighth story of the Tower of Olympus, which is the
that renders it capable of metamorphoses, of an place of regeneration of the royal couple whose
evolutionary process that begins with evil and ends “chemical wedding” will be the supreme act of
with good. It has issued from Saturn, the diabolus, unification that completes the Great Work.
who is its father, but it becomes the mystagogue, From the moment they appeared, the first
the mediator par excellence between heaven and Rosicrucian writings aroused the interest of many
earth, between matter and spirit; in short, it is the readers throughout Europe: among the French,
philosophic stone, the universal tincture. Thus the Descartes and Gabriel Naudé; in England, where
transformation of the spiritus Mercurius into a their impact was considerable, > Elias Ashmole
healing medicine is explained within a hermetic (1617-1692), Samuel Hartlib (1595-1662), John
perspective. As the alchemical texts of Andreae’s Dury (1595-1680), the pansophist physician >

--- Page 438 ---
ROSICRUCIANISM I: FIRST HALF OF THE 17TH CENTURY IO14
Robert Fludd (1574-1637) and his German col- 1997 # Bernhard Kofmann, Alchemie und Mystik
in Johann Valentin Andreaes “Chymischer Hochzeit
league > Michael Maier (1568-1622); in Moravia,
Christiani Rosencreutz, Koln: Universitat, 1966 ¢@
> Jan Amos Comenius (1592-1670), who gave the
Hans Schick, Das dltere Rosenkreuzertum: Ein Beitrag
Rosicrucian ideas a planetary dimension and antic- zur Entstebungsgeschichte der Freimaurerei, Berlin:
ipated the humanitarianism of > Freemasonry. Nordland, 1942 (re-edited as Die geheime Geschichte
From the Royal Society of London to the Alchemi- der Rosenkreuzer, in the series “Dokumenta Rosi-
cal Society of Nuremberg and the folio volumes of cruciana”, Schwarzenburg: Ansata Verlag, 1980)
+ Gottfried Arnold, the Rosicrucian influence per- Robert Vanloo, Les Rose-Croix du Nouveau Monde,
Paris: Claire Vigne, 1996 @ idem, L’Utopie Rose Croixsisted throughout the 17th century. This influence
du XVII° siecle a nos jours, Paris: Dervy, 2001 @
remained literary, however: there is no proof that
Frances A. Yates, The Rosicrucian Enlightenment
the Brotherhood of the Rose Cross described in the (1972), London & New York: Ark, 1986.
Fama Fraternitatis ever existed, and it is only in the
r8th century that actual organizations calling ROLAND EDIGHOFFER
themselves “rosicrucian” first come into existence.
Rosicrucianism II: 18th Century
“The Rosicrucian Manifestos” (Fama Fraternitatis
and Confessio Fraternitatis), translated by Thomas About one century after the original Rosicrucian
Vaughan (1652), in: Frances A. Yates, The Rosicrucian manifestoes [> Rosicrucianism I], in 1710, Samuel
Enlightenment, London & Boston, 1972, 235-260
Richter published in Breslau, under the pseudonym
Joh. Valentin Andreae, Fama Fraternitatis/Confessio
Sincerus Renatus, a book titled Die wahrhaffte und Fraternitatis/Chymische Hochzeit Christiani Rosen-
kreutz. Anno 1459 (Richard van Dilmen, ed. & intr.), vollkommene Beschreibung des philosophischen
Stuttgart: Calwer Verlag, 1973 @ Joscelyn Godwin and Steins der Bruderschaft aus dem Orden des
Adam McLean, The Chemical Wedding of Christian Giilden- und Rosenkreutzes denen Filiis Doctrinae
Rosenkreutz, Grand Rapids: Phanes Press, 1991 ¢@ zum Besten publiciret. It is significant that the
Ashley McFadden, A Rosicrucian Primer, Edmonds:
author had added the word Giilden (golden) to the
Holmes Publishing Group, 1994 @ Pleun van der Kooi,
generic term Rose Cross, for this detail changes Fama Fraternitatis: Das Urmanifest der Rosenkreuzer
Bruderschaft zum ersten Mal nach den Manuskripten the meaning of the original myth by accentuating
bearbeitet, die vor dem Erstdruck von 1614 entstanden the alchemical Theo-Philosophia Theoretico-Prac-
sind, Haarlem: Rozekruis Pers, 1998 @ The Rosicrucian tica (according to the title of a work published by
Manifestos: Fama Fraternitatis and Confessio Fraterni- Sincerus Renatus in 1711). Moreover, to the book
tatis, Acrobat Edition prepared by Benjamin Rowe, of 1710 he attached fifty-two articles about the
Typeset in Bembo and Minion Display, 2000.
practical organization and continuation of what he
Lit.: Susanna Akerman, Rose Cross over the Baltic: called the “Society of the Golden and Rosy Cross”.
The Spread of Rosicrucianism in Northern Europe At its head stood, according to him, an imperator
(Brill’s Studies in Intellectual History), Leiden, Boston, appointed for life. The members, unlike those of the
Koln: E.J. Brill, 1998 @ Bibliotheca Philosophica Her- original Rose Cross described in the manifestoes,
metica (ed.), Das Erbe des Christian Rosenkreuz, Ams- could be Catholic; but brothers were forbidden to
terdam: In de Pelikaan, 1988 @ idem, Rosenkreuz als
enquire about the religious persuasion of their fel-
europdisches Phanomen im 17. Jahrhundert, Amster-
low brethren. They could not marry, but were dam: In de Pelikaan, 2002 Roland Edighoffer, Rose-
Croix et société idéale selon Johann Valentin Andreae, allowed to have sexual relations if their desire was
2 vols., Neuilly-sur-Seine/Paris: Arma Artis, 1982/1987 too intense. Some of the fifty-two articles referred
¢ idem, Les Rose-Croix, Paris: Presses Universitaires to the brothers’ alchemical powers, their capacity
de France, 3° éd., 1991 @ idem, Die Rosenkreuzer, to materialize the philosopher’s stone, precious
Miinchen: C.H. Beck, 1995 @ idem, Les Rose-Croix et gems or pearls, as well as their ability to rejuvenate
la Crise de Conscience européenne au XVII® siécle
and renew themselves. Sincerus Renatus empha-
(Bibliotheque de l’Hermétisme), Paris: Dervy, 1998
@ Regine Frey-Jaun, Die Berufung des Tiirhiiters: sized in his preface the divine character of true
Zur “Chymischen Hochzeit Christiani Rosencreutz” alchemy, whose goal is the purification of Man and
(1586-1654), Bern: Peter Lang, 1989 @ EF. Leigh Gar- Nature. Moreover, he stated that the Rosicrucians
dener, Bibliotheca Rosicruciana, Thame, Oxon: Man- had moved to India to live there in peace. Although
drake Press, 1992 @ Carlos Gilly, “Das Ratsel um die he invited his readers to join the Society, it is prac-
RC-Manifeste”, in: van der Kooij, Fama Fraternitatis,
tically proven now that in his era, a Society of the
Haarlem: Rozekruis Pers, 1998, 11-16 @ idem, Adam
Golden and Rosy Cross did not in fact exist. Haslmayer, der erste Verkiinder der Manifeste der
Rosenkreuzer (Pimander, Texts and Studies), Amster- The edition of the complete works of Sincerus
dam: In de Pelikaan, 1994 # Christopher McIntosh, Renatus appeared in 1741, on the threshold of the
The Rosicrucians, 3rd ed., York Beach: Samuel Weiser, second half of the 18th century. The preamble to

--- Page 439 ---
IOI§ ROSICRUCIANISM II: 18TH CENTURY
this edition puts emphasis on regeneration, consid- A professor of medicine at the University of
ers alchemy a vocatio secundaria, and warns that Marburg, Friedrich Joseph Wilhelm Schroder
its “theosophical doctrines” must not be read with (1733-1778), developed between 1766 and 1774 a
the eyes of reason but with those of the spirit. The significant activity within the circles of Rosicru-
title of the complete edition, Theo-Philosophia cians that now existed. Ralph Christian Zim-
Theoretico-Practica, is explained by a sentence in mermann has assembled documentation which
the preface (p. 134): ‘We say that philosophy with- strongly suggests that the Swabian Pietist > Fried-
out true theology has nothing enduring in it’, rich Christoph Oetinger (1702-1782), the theoreti-
Referring to the Paracelsian doctrine of “signa- cian of a “philosophia sacra”, had some contacts
tures”, Sincerus Renatus states that God manifests with the founders of the Gold- und Rosenkreuzer.
himself through nature like the soul manifests itself Patriarchalphysik, a work published in 1772 and
through the body (p. 286). attributed to him, seems to demonstrate that he
In opposition to the spirit of the Aufklarung, Sin- was their maitre a penser. Finally, > Goethe took
cerus Renatus’ work was to enjoy considerable an interest in the Rosicrucian myth as well. He had
success among the European intelligentsia of the read the novel Chymische Hochzeit Christiani
second half of the 18th century, parallel to that of Rosenkreutz and in 1786 he dedicated to Charlotte
the Pietists [-> Pietism], who were likewise open to von Stein some verses inspired by the song of the
hermeticism and alchemy. Starting from about nymphs contained in it. Around the same period
1750, a “Rosicrucian tradition” henceforth came Goethe began writing his Die Geheimnisse (The
to be opposed to the rationalism that, notably in Mysteries), an epic influenced by Rosicrucian sym-
the case of Helvetius, led to a materialistic atheism. bolism, which shows how the pilgrim Brother
In Germany, a doctor Johann Ludolph ab Indagine Markus reaches an idealized Montserrat. A monas-
printed a new edition in 1751 of Conrad Orvius’s tic order which seems a mixture between the Tem-
Occulta Philosophia (first published in 1737), plars [> Neo-Templar Traditions], the community
which purported to be from a Rosicrucian society of the Holy > Grail and the Rosicrucian Society
in Holland. In 1761, a member of the “Assembly of has a certain Humanus as prior. He is a symbol of
Prague” had an Aureum Vellus seu Iunioratus the Total Man, destined to accomplish the new
Fratrum Rosae Crucis published, which contained Easter (Passover) of a humanity finally reconciled,
the statutes, rituals and membership list of a “Soci- and promote the synthesis of all forms of religios-
ety of the Golden and Rosy Cross”; but partly this ity, Christian, Masonic or Spinozist. In 1782,
document repeats verbatim the work published by Goethe was accepted into the Inner Order of the
~ Hermann Fictuld in 1749 (see analysis in Faivre high grades of the Strict Observance, and the fol-
1990, 73-82). In 1762, it was in France that baron lowing year he entered, with Duke Charles-August
Schoudy, originally from Metz, organized Adonhi- de Weimar, the Bavarian Order of the > Illumi-
ramite ~ Freemasonry, the seventh grade of which naten, whose purpose was to combat the ‘enemies
was called Knight of the Rose Cross or of the of reason and of humanity’. The Bavarian Illumi-
“unknown philosopher”, thus introducing a Rosi- naten did not look favourable on the Rosicrucians,
crucian tendency into the lodges. whose alchemical theories were opposed to sci-
Lorraine is not far from the Palatinate and from entific materialism and who had now gained a con-
Sulzbach, residence of a doctor named Bernhard siderable influence in Freemasonry.
Joseph Schleis von Lowenfeld (1731-1800), who In 1777 appeared a work fictitiously dated 5555
became provincial leader of the Order named and entitled Starke Erweise aus den eigenen
“Gold- und Rosenkreuzer” (see infra), under the Schriften des Hochheiligen Ordens Gold- und
pseudonym Phoebron. From a later controversy Rosenkreutzer . . . (Strong Proofs Drawn from the
between him and baron von Ecker und Eckhofen, Writings of the Very Holy Order of the Gold- und
the author of a pamphlet published in 1782 under Rosenkreuzer . . .), containing instructions meant
the title Der Rosenkreuzer in seine Blosse (The for the use of Brethren who were already ‘Masters
Rosicrucian in his Nakedness), it appears that the of the Reflection of the Light’. Both this date and
first creation of a Rosicrucian order in Germany this work signal the “official” foundation of the
can be dated from 1763. In the same year 1782, Order of the “Gold- und Rosenkreuzer Alteren Sys-
Phoebron wrote his book Der im Lichte der tems” (Gold- and Rosicrucians of the Ancient Sys-
Wahrheit strahlende Rosenkreuzer (The Rosicru- tem), which was to flourish until 1782 (see infra).
cian Radiant in the Light of Truth), stating that all In 1778 was published a Hermetisches A.B.C. deren
the knowledge of the patriarchs had been transmit- dchten Weisen dlter und neuer Zeiten vom Stein
ted to the accomplished Rosicrucians (p. 254). der Weisen (Hermetic A.B.C. of the Philosopher’s

--- Page 440 ---
ROSICRUCIANISM Il: 18TH CENTURY IOI6
Stone According to the True Sages of Ancient and symbol was a gold and red cross. Its members,
Recent Times). In 1779, the Rosicrucian doctor established in Palestine, had left the country in
from Leipzig, Adam Michael Birkholz, published t118 after the defeat of the Crusaders and had
his Der Compass der Weisen (the Compass of the spread all over the world. Three of them had cre-
Sages). In 1781, Wéllner and Jugel republished the ated in Scotland “The Scottish Order of the
Aurea Catena Homeri under the title Annulus Pla- ‘Builders of the East’”, as a foundation for their
tonis, while in the same year, Friedrich Nicolai confraternity. > Ramon Llull had been one of its
procured a reprinting of the first Rosicrucian directors, and King Edward I (1239-1307) one of
manifestoes and the Chemical Wedding of Christ- its members. Descendants of the families of Lan-
ian Rosenkreutz. In 1785, J.D.A. Eckhardt had caster and York, their coats of arms comprised of a
printed in Altona the Geheime Figuren der Rosen- white rose and a red rose (cf. the War of the Roses),
kreuzer aus dem 16ten und 17ten Jahrhundert were members as well. It was from these blazons,
(Secret Figures of the Rosicrucians Dating from the blended with Ormusian Christianity, that the name
16th and 17th Centuries), a marvelous album still Rosicrucian had been derived. Over the centuries,
in print today. In the same year appeared a 280- the Order had declined, until Cromwell reactivated
page treatise entitled Die theoretischen Briider it and changed the denomination of “Construc-
oder zweite Stufe der Rosenkreutzer und ihrer tors” into “Freemasons”. The legend thus strongly
Instruktion (The Theorici Brothers or the Second emphasized the precedence of the Rosicrucians
Degree of the Rosicrucians and their Instruction). with respect to the Freemasons, who were consid-
In 1788 was printed in Leipzig Das Geheimnis aller ered no more than spiritual descendants of the for-
Geheimnisse ex Macrocosmo et Microcosmo, oder mer, and who possessed merely a reflection of the
der giildene Begriff der geheimsten Geheimnisse true Light of the ancient Rosicrucian tradition.
der Rosen- und Giilden-Kreutzer mit ihren drey The development of the Gold- und Rosenkreuzer
Steinen der Wunder (The Secret of all Secrets ex of the Ancient System was impressive. Societies had
Macrocosmo and Microcosmo, or the Golden been created in Silesia, Upper Lusatia, Marburg,
Concept of the Most Secret Secrets of the Golden Ratisbonne, and Leipzig. Vienna was an important
Rosicrucians with their Three Miraculous Stones). center of Rosicrucian influence for all of Austria,
The proliferation of these editions or reprints is Hungary, Bavaria, Wurtemberg and Poland. The
testimony to the interest of many readers in > Grand Master of the Masons of Austria, prince von
Christian theosophy at the very time of the Aufkla- Dietrichstein (1728-1808), was himself received
rung, and to the prominent role that the Gold- und into that Order. In Vienna, J.R. von Bischoff-
Rosenkreuzer had come to play in Freemasonry. swerder, an officer in the service of prince Charles
According to some of these publications, Master de Saxe, keenly interested in the occult sciences,
Masons possessed no more than a “reflection of the was accepted into a Rosicrucian circle in 1777. He
Light” and had therefore access only to the outer then went to Leipzig, and next to Wiesbaden, and
Temple. As adepts of the philosophia perennis, the entered into relations with J.C. Wéllner (1732-
Rosicrucians considered themselves heirs to a gno- 1800); this former pastor who had become a
sis transmitted by the angels to one of Noah’s Freemason was thirsty for supernatural knowl-
descendents, who had not participated in building edge, and had been accepted into the Rosicrucian
the Tower of Babel; and Abraham had benefited circle of Berlin in 1779. These two characters have
from a supernatural knowledge subsequently culti- been mainly responsible for a rapid development of
vated by Nazarean Magi. Moses had been initi- the administration of the Golden Rosicrucians of
ated in Egypt, and the tradition had been nurtured the Ancient System: by the end of 1779, it already
by the great biblical prophets, the adepts of the included twenty-six Rosicrucian circles, distrib-
Eleusinian mysteries, the Pythagoreans, the Druids uted over various German cities. In Berlin,
and the Bards. In Egypt, where St Mark preached Bischoffswerder managed to gain the trust and col-
the Gospel, an Alexandrine priest named Ormus laboration of Prince Frederick William (1744-
had been baptized in the year 46 together with six 1797), heir presumptive of Frederick II of Prussia.
other adepts. His name was a deformation of He succeeded in curing the prince of an illness by
Ormazd, the god of light and goodness, who had means of a secret remedy, and did not hesitate (with
revealed the mysteries of Mazdaism to the great the support of Wéllner and the prince’s mistress) to
prophet > Zoroaster. Still according to the same dupe him by using the services of a false Viennese
legend, Ormus, once converted to Christianity, had magician, a certain Steinert. By a variety of stage
founded the Society of the Sages of Light, whose tricks, the Austrian ventriloquist conjured before

--- Page 441 ---
IO17 ROSICRUCIANISM II: 18TH CENTURY
Frederick William the ghosts of Leibniz, Julius Nicolai. His Bemerkungen tiber den Ursprung und
Caesar, Marcus Aurelius and the Prince Elector, die Geschichte der Rosenkreuzer und Freymaurer
founder of the Prussian dynasty. Full of enthusi- (Comments on the Origin and History of the Rose
asm, the prince asked to be affiliated with the Rose Cross and the Freemasons), which appeared in
Cross, and was admitted in 1781, under the Berlin in 1806, also challenged the assumed link
hieronym Ormesus, by Duke Frederick August of between the Golden Rose Cross and the Rosicru-
Brunswick. In the wake of this political success, the cian myth of Johann Valentin Andreae in the 17th
Golden Rose Cross of the Ancient System suc- century. The claim of such a continuity had already
ceeded in attracting into its orbit the Mother Lodge been cast into doubt in 1781 by Adolf von Knigge
of the Prussian States, the Three Globes. in his book Uber Jesuiten, Freymaurer und deutsche
Despite such success, the end of Golden Rosicru- Rosenkreutzer (On the Jesuits, the Freemasons and
cians of the Ancient System was near. In 1782 an the German Rose Cross).
international Convention of Freemasonry met at In Prussia, the Rosicrucian prince Frederick
Wilhelmsbad, putting an end to the templar filia- William’s accession to the throne enabled W6llner
tions, and validating the Reform of Lyon estab- to become minister of religion; in this function he
lished by > Willermoz. The Rosicrucians, trying to concentrated on combating the irreligiosity spread
be admitted to the Convention of Wilhelmsbad, by Enlightenment ideas and the pretended IIlumi-
sent duke Ferdinand of Brunswick a memorandum naten. An edict of 9 July 1788 condemned deist
composed by Wollner and members of the Ancient pastors and teachers and prohibited any theo-
Scottish Lodge Frederick of the Golden Lion. logical discussion of rationalist tendencies, while
Rather awkwardly written, it expressed the Rosi- books by “free-thinking” authors were censored.
crucians’ intentions of bringing the Masons, who The ideology of the Golden Rosicrucians of the
were confined to the threshold of the Temple, out Ancient System certainly influenced neither the
of the shadows and into the light; and it reserved political economy nor the exterior politics of Prus-
authority concerning the higher grades for them- sia; but the Rosicrucian tradition continued
selves. Since the Landgraf Carl von Hessen was throughout the following century, and has in-
attracted by Rosicrucian esotericism, Ferdinand’s fluenced the opposition to Enlightenment rational-
reply was diplomatic enough not to offend those ism characteristic of the German movement of
responsible for the Golden Rosicrucians of the Sturm und Drang and European > Romanticism.
Ancient System, while nevertheless dissuading
Codex Rosae Crucis, D.O.M.A., A Rare and Curious
them from participating in the Convention of Wil-
Manuscript of Rosicrucian Interest. Now published for
helmsbad. In any case, the author of the pamphlet the first time in its original form, Los Angeles, 1983
Der Rosenkreuzer in seine Blosse (see above), as Schriften der Gold- und Rosenkreuzer (Christopher
well as some of the Bavarian IIluminaten, believed McIntosh, ed.), Sinzheim: Archiv fiir altes und ge-
that the Golden Rosicrucians were directed behind heimes Wissen, 1999 Bernhard Beyer, Das Lehrsys-
the scenes by members of the Company of Jesus, tem des Ordens der Gold- und Rosenkreuzer, Leipzig:
Pansophie- Verlag, 1925.
suppressed in 1773 by Pope Clement XIV.
By 1783, the Golden Rosicrucians of the Ancient Lit.: Roland Edighoffer, Die Rosenkreuzer, Munich:
System were widespread in Hungary, in Poland and C.H. Beck, 1995, roo-r11 @ Antoine Faivre, The
in Russia, where they attempted to attract the here- Golden Fleece and Alchemy, Albany: SUNY Press 1993,
40-47. @ Karl R.H. Frick, “Die Rosenkreuzer
ditary Grand Duke. In Austria, however, a govern-
als erdichtete und wirkliche Geheimgesellschaft”, in:
mental decree caused the Rosicrucian circles to close;
Gerd-Klaus Kaltenbrunner (ed.), Geheimgesellschaften
and in Germany, where Frederick William had und der Mythos der Weltverschworung, Munich:
become the reigning sovereign, Bischoffswerder Herder, 1987 @ Christopher McIntosh, The Rose Cross
and Wollner, who were hoping for high functions and the Age of Reason, Leiden/New York/Koln: E.J.
in Prussia, prudently chose to decree in 1787 a Brill, 1992 @ Horst Moller, “Die Bruderschaft der Gold-
“general silanum” that put an end to the activities und Rosenkreuzer: Struktur, Zielsetzung und Wirkung
einer anti-aufklarerischen Geheimgesellschaft”, in: Hel-
of the Golden Rosicrucians of the Ancient System.
mut Reinalter (ed.), Freimaurer und Geheimbiinde in
The order of the Bavarian Illuminaten did not sur- 18. Jahrhundert in Mitteleuropa, Frankfurt a.M.:
vive them by long, disappearing completely in 1790. Suhrkamp, 1983, 199-239 @ Richard van Diilmen, Der
These two movements, although opposed to one Geheimbund der Illuminaten, Stuttgart: Fromann, 1978
another in their basic ideas and aspirations, were in ¢ Rolf Christian Zimmermann, Das Weltbild des jungen
fact closely connected, as attested by the research Goethe, 2 vols., Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 1969/1979.
on Rosicrucian history by the Aufklarer Friedrich ROLAND EDIGHOFFER

--- Page 442 ---
ROSICRUCIANISM III: 19TH-20TH CENTURY rors
Rosicrucianism III: 19th-20th Century (1825-1875), and AMORC. Although there are
several other Rosicrucian organizations, we will
No Rosicrucian Orders in the r9th and zoth cen- deal with three in particular, which have reached
tury could rightly claim a direct connection to 17th international dimensions: the Rosicrucian Fellow-
century counterparts. We will deal here with Rosi- ship, the Lectorium Rosicrucianum, and AMORC.
crucian Orders as autonomous organizations, and Carl Louis von Grasshoff (1865-1919) was born
not particularly with Rosicrucian degrees within > in Denmark into a German aristocratic family. He
Freemasonry. The oldest modern masonic Rosicru- spent his early manhood wandering the seas as a
cian Order is the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia, merchant ship captain, and settled first in New
which was established in London in 1865-1866 by York (where he worked as an engineer), then in Los
Robert Wentworth Little (1840-1878), an officer Angeles (1903). In the meantime, he had joined the
within mainstream English Freemasonry. This soci- + Theosophical Society, and in 1907 decided to
ety, in its turn, generated two American offsprings, travel to Germany, where he met > Rudolf Steiner
the Societas Rosicruciana in Civitatibus Foederatis (1861-1925), the later founder of ~ Anthroposo-
and the Societas Rosicruciana in America (both phy and at that time a leader of the German Theo-
still in existence, but with a very limited con- sophical Society. Grasshoff later claimed to have met
stituency). It also influenced the > Hermetic Order a mysterious “Elder Brother of the Rose Cross”,
of the Golden Dawn and, later, its splinter group who took him to a secret temple on the border
founded by Paul Foster Case (1884-1954) and between Germany and Bohemia. After his return to
known as Builders of the Adytum (BOTA). California, Grasshoff published in 1909 his mag-
In France, small Rosicrucian bodies were active num opus, The Rosicrucian Cosmo-Conception,
in Toulouse from the first decades of the roth cen- under the pseudonym of ~ Max Heindel; and in
tury, gathering around Viscount Louis-Charles- 1910 he married a well-known astrologer, Augusta
Edouard de Lapasse (1792-1867). A larger and Foss (1865-1949). Between 1910-1918, Heindel
particularly significant organization was the Kab- went on to publish several works on > astrology, >
balistic Order of the Rose Cross, founded in Paris Freemasonry, and esotericism in general. He
in 1887 by > Stanislas de Guaita (1861-1897), > launched a Rosicrucian Fellowship in 1909, which
Papus (Gérard Encausse, 1865-1916), and > was Officially incorporated in r911. He also super-
Joséphin Péladan (1858-1918). The latter, an vised the construction of the Fellowship’s inter-
eccentric poet and very independent Roman national headquarters in Oceanside (California),
Catholic, broke with the Kabbalistic Order in 1890 including a temple and beautiful gardens.
to create the rival Catholic Order of the Rosy Cross After Heindel’s death in 1919, his wife Augusta
of Temple and Grail. The two Orders fought bit- continued the Fellowship’s expansion into several
terly, and an amused press dubbed the controversy foreign countries, with a membership of thou-
the “war of the two roses”. Péladan’s organization sands. Unlike other Rosicrucian organizations, the
never had many members, but it did exert consid- Fellowship had, since its very beginning, a clearly
erable influence on French literature, art, and > religious orientation, as evident from the fact that
music at the time. More significant for the first its practices included rituals for weddings and
modern Rosicrucian generation was the Kabba- funerals, as well as spiritual healing services. While
listic Order, although it is difficult to distinguish astrology remains an important part of the Fellow-
it from several other occult organizations also ship’s teachings even today, the influence of Theos-
headed by Papus. Heirs of Papus’ Rosicrucianism ophy and Anthroposophy is also apparent. It
did, however, attend the 1934 foundation meeting teaches karma (the “Law of Consequence”), >
of FUDOSI (Universal Federation of Orders and reincarnation (the “Law of Rebirth”), and believes
Society of Initiation), which would continue to in a succession of (theosophical) “root races” on
exist until 1951. Dissatisfied with FUDOSI, other Earth. Heindel also offered an occult interpretation
Rosicrucian organizations joined several different of the United States’ role in history. The Fellowship
Orders into the rival federation known as FUD- promotes vegetarianism, and warns against the evil
OFSI. This European controversy was a conse- effects of alcohol, drugs, and tobacco. Alcohol, it
quence of the rivalry in the United States between teaches, had an occult purpose within the frame-
two American Rosicrucian Orders, the Fraternitas work of the descent of the human spirit into mat-
Rosae Crucis established by Reuben Swinburne ter: it was used to enable humans to forget their
Clymer (1878-1966) on the basis (inter alia) of the higher selves in the fifth, or “Aryan”, epoch. In
occult doctrines of > Pascal Beverly Randolph preparing for the coming Aquarian Age, humans

--- Page 443 ---
IOrg ROSICRUCIANISM III: 19TH-20TH CENTURY
should regain knowledge of their higher selves, and the “dialectic” Order, including both the dead
however, and consumption of all forms of alcohol and the living, and subject to the cycle of living,
is therefore rejected. dying and being born again. However, it is not the
The Lectorium Rosicrucianum, or the Interna- ego which reincarnates, but the human microcosm,
tional School of the Golden Rosy Cross, was the latter being called to overcome the wheel of life
founded by Jan Leene (1896-1968) and his brother and death in order to reach the divine realm of
Zwier Wilhelm Leene (1892-1938), both leaders of immortality and Light. Within the human micro-
the Rosicrucian Fellowship in the Netherlands. cosm, a divine spark remains latent in the heart and
Although the events leading to the Lectorium’s calls for a return “home” to the Kingdom of
foundation date back to August 24, 1924, it was Heaven. Guiding its members in this process of
not until 1935 that the Leenes and Ms. Henny awakening and “transfiguration” is the Lecto-
Stok-Huyser (1902-1990), who had joined them in rium’s main purpose.
1930, formally declared their independence from AMORC, the Ancient and Mystical Order Rosae
the Fellowship and established a Rosicrucian Soci- Crucis, insists that it is not a religion, and that it
ety of their own (Rozekruisers Genootschap, includes members (“students”) from several differ-
whose name was changed to Order of the ent religious backgrounds. AMORC was founded
Manicheans in 1936). After Z.W. Leene’s death in in 1915 by Harvey Spencer Lewis (1883-1939),
1938, Jan Leene and Ms. Stok-Huyser, under the a New York advertising agent who had been
respective pen names of > Jan van Rijckenborgh among the founders of the New York Society of
and Catharose de Petri, started writing several Psychical Research. Lewis regarded the Wis-
books about their teachings, which took the shape sahickon (Pennsylvania) community founded in
of a kind of Christian > gnosticism influenced by > 1694 by Johannes Kelpius (1673-1708) as the first
hermetism, 17th century ~ Rosicrucianism, and > American Rosicrucian experiment, claiming that
Jacob Boehme (1575-1624). Following the nazi some of his ancestors had been involved in it. In
invasion of the Netherlands, the movement was 1909 Lewis visited France, and reported that he
proscribed, its property confiscated, and several had been initiated into the Rosy Cross in an “old
members executed. It continued its activities under- tower” in Toulouse. The first national AMORC
ground throughout the war years, however, and in conference was held in Pittsburgh in 1917; the
1945 the movement was reorganized and resur- Order later moved to San Francisco, Tampa
faced under the name of Lectorium Rosicru- (Florida), and (in 1927) to San Jose, California,
cianum. In 1948, the two founders met Antonin where its world headquarters (including a temple,
Gadal (1871-1962), one of the founding fathers of museum, library, and planetarium) have become
modern ~ neo-Catharism, who in 1957 would one of the city’s main tourist attractions. After
become the first President of the French branch of AMORC?’s success in the United States, several
the Lectorium. It was after the founders’ deaths more or less independent AMORCs were estab-
that the Lectorium, led by an International Spiri- lished in Europe. Some of them later went their sep-
tual Directorate, became a truly international arate ways (such as AAORRAC, the Antiquus
movement, with currently some 15.000 “mem- Arcanus Ordo Rosae Rubae Aureae Crucis, led by
bers” and “pupils”. “Members” of the school are Eduard Munninger, 1901-1965), but Lewis, work-
those not yet prepared to “live” the teachings, and ing jointly with Jeanne Guesdon (1884-1955), was
are distinguished from “pupils” who meet regu- able to keep the large French-speaking branch
larly for services in the temples that the Lectorium within the main fold. He was succeeded as leader
has established in a number of countries. Pupils are (“Imperator”) of AMORC by his son, Ralph
expected to practice a healthy life style, abstain Maxwell Lewis (1904-1987).
from alcohol and drugs, reject all occult practices When Ralph died, Gary L. Stewart, despite being
and any form of communication with the dead, and only 34 years old, was elected Imperator with the
remain wary of the dangers of being unduly support of Raymond Bernard, the powerful leader
influenced by the media (particularly television). of the French-speaking branch. Stewart was soon
Important references in understanding the Lecto- in conflict with the Board of Directors, however,
rium’s ideas are Gnosticism and > Catharism, as and in 1990 was replaced by Raymond Bernard’s
well as its efforts to reconcile its teachings with son, Christian. After the 1990 crisis, two of Stew-
those of 17th century Rosicrucianism (which, art’s supporters, Paul Walden and Ashley McFad-
unlike the former, was not dualistic). A key teach- den, established the Ancient Rosae Crucis (ARC),
ing distinguishes between the original divine Order, while Stewart himself founded a Confraternity of

--- Page 444 ---
ROSICRUCIANISM III: I19TH-20TH CENTURY 1020
the Rose Cross. The elder Bernard, in turn, dis- dozens of smaller Rosicrucian bodies are also
tanced himself from AMORC and established a active throughout the world. One of the most
variety of separate organizations including CIRCES significant is the Fraternitas Rosicruciana Antiqua
(International Committee for Charitable and (FRA), established in the 1920s in Latin America
Social Works), now presented as the humanitarian by Arnoldo Krumm-Heller (1879-1949). A one-
branch of the Sovereign Order of the Temple of Ini- time associate of > Aleister Crowley (1875-1947),
tiation, a neo-Templar organization Bernard had Krumm-Heller was able to build the largest Span-
created while still a leader of AMORC. It is fair ish-speaking Rosicrucian organization, with teach-
to say, however, that AMORC remains, by far, ings drawn from ~ Freemasonry, Theosophy,
the largest international Rosicrucian organization, and several different systems of sex magic. FRA
with hundreds of thousands of members (the figure split into a number of competing branches after
of “six millions”, often quoted, refers to the Or- Krumm-Heller’s death in 1949, none of them as
der’s mailing list). large as the parent organization had been before
Most AMORC members enrol in correspon- World War II. FRA and Krumm-Heller are impor-
dence courses and follow the instructions included tant, however, for their role in the formation of the
in the Order’s “monographs”. For the first nine Gnostic Movement and the Gnostic Church
degrees, initiations may be self-conferred at home founded in the 1950s in Mexico by Samael Aun
(although they may also be received in a temple). Weor (Victor Manuel Gomez Rodriguez, 1917-
For the tenth, eleventh and twelfth degrees, there 1977), a Colombian FRA member and a pupil of
are no initiations because the member at this stage Krumm-Heller. Although divided, in turn, into sev-
is advanced enough to establish a direct contact eral dozens of rival groups after Weor’s death, the
with the occult hierarchy. Before entering the nine Gnostic Movement founded by the Colombian
degrees, each student goes through five introduc- esotericist still maintains teachings and features of
tory lessons and three “Atria” as a neophyte, learn- Krumm-Heller’s FRA. Combined membership of
ing inter alia the structure of matter, the power of its branches runs in the tens of thousands, and
thought, Rosicrucian healing treatments, karma (although not “purely” Rosicrucian) Weor’s move-
and reincarnation. Additional information about ment should probably be included, along with the
these and other esoteric themes is offered during the Rosicrucian Fellowship, AMORC and the Lecto-
course of the nine degrees process, usually com- rium Rosicrucianum, as being among the largest
pleted in five or six years. Beyond the ninth degree, international bodies still claiming some sort of
secret teachings include mystical techniques of con- Rosicrucian heritage in the 21st century.
centration, meditation, visualization, and spiritual
Max Heindel, The Rosicrucian Cosmo-Conception or
+ alchemy. AMORC teaches that, ideally, humans
Mystic Christianity: An Elementary Treatise Upon
should reincarnate every 144 years (or live to the
Man’s Past Evolution, Present Constitution and Future
age of 144 years, then die and reincarnate immedi- Development (7th ed.), Oceanside (California): Inter-
ately). The students’ aim, rather than escape in the national Headquarters Rosicrucian Fellowship, 1925
cycle of reincarnations, is to be received into the ¢ Jan van Rijckenborgh, Dei Gloria Intacta, Haarlem:
Great Wide Brotherhood through a “cosmic initia- Rozekruis Pers, 19955 # Ralph M. Lewis, Cosmic Mis-
tion”. AMORC insists that it is the heir of a tradi- sion Fulfilled, San Jose (California): Supreme Grand
Lodge of AMORG, 1966.
tion dating right back to ancient Egypt and
Pharaoh Tutmosis III (t 1450 B.C.). Documents Lit.: Joscelyn Godwin, The Theosophical Enlighten-
confirming this, it is claimed, exist in the San Jose ment, Albany (New York): State University of New
archives. Other teachings concern Jesus Christ, York Press, 1994, 247-274 # Massimo Introvigne, I/
who is regarded as a member of the Essene Broth- cappello del mago: I nuovi movimenti magici dallo
spiritismo al satanismo, Milan: SugarCo, 1990, 184-erhood [+ Essenes] who did not die on the cross
215 @ Christopher McIntosh, The Rosicrucians: The
but was saved from it and retired to a monastery on
History, Mythology, and Rituals of an Esoteric Order,
Mount Carmel. Astrology, occult anatomy, and the York Beach: Samuel Weiser, 1997 @ Robert Vanloo,
study of the esoteric meaning of numbers [>> Num- L’'Utopie Rose-Croix du XVII° siecle a nos jours, Paris:
ber Symbolism], sounds and geometrical shapes Dervy, 2001 @ Robert Vanloo, Les Rose-Croix du
complete AMORC’s teachings. Controversies Nouveau Monde: Aux sources du rosicrucianisme
notwithstanding, AMORC maintains a very visible moderne, Paris: Claire Vigne, 1996, 253-402 @ Harald
Lamprecht, Neue Rosenkreuzer, Gottingen: Vanden-presence, thanks to its temples, publishing houses,
Hoeck & Ruprecht, 2002.
and magazines in several countries.
Beyond the three largest organizations, several MASSIMO INTROVIGNE

--- Page 445 ---
IoO2I RUDOLF II
Rudolf Il of Habsburg, * 18.7.1552 scientific instruments. Rudolf liked to watch his
Vienna, + 20.1.1612 Prague employees at work, and sometimes worked him-
self, notably at goldsmithing. Unlike his contem-
Holy Roman Emperor, King of Bohemia and poraries, he did not display his collections to
Hungary. Son of Emperor Maximilian II (1527- demonstrate his wealth, power, taste, and univer-
1576) and his first cousin Maria, daughter of sality, but kept them jealously for his own study
Emperor Charles V. From 1564-1571 Rudolf was and enjoyment. Very few visitors were admitted to
sent to Spain to be educated under the supervision the Kunstkammer, which then took on a mythical
of Philip Il. He was crowned King of Bohemia in reputation.
1575, and elected Holy Roman Emperor the fol- In Spain, Rudolf had been indoctrinated with
lowing year. In 1583 he moved the imperial capital Spanish court ceremonial and a strict Catholic
from Vienna to Prague. Rudolf never married, faith. He adhered to the former all his life, in his
though he spent much energy on failed matrimo- black costume and the rigid etiquette of his court.
nial plans. Consequently he was succeeded by his The latter had the contrary effect: the sight of an
hated brother Matthias (1557-1619), who usurped auto da fé (execution) of heretics in Toledo had
Rudolf’s titles and forced him into retirement inclined him to a lifelong policy of non-compulsion
in I6IT. in religious matters. For a long period he avoided
Rudolf Il was unequalled as a patron of the arts all rites of the Church. From 1601-1608 his friend
and sciences. Those who worked at his court for a Johannes Pistorius (1546-1608) persuaded him to
longer or shorter time included Carolus Clusius the confess and communicate at Easter, but Rudolf
botanist (1526-1609), Joannes Sambucus the his- died, as his father had done, without receiving the
torian (1531-1584), the antiquaries Jacopo Strada sacraments. Given his eirenic disposition, Rudolf
(1515-1588) and his son Ottavio (15 50-1606), the was frightened by fanaticism, whether it was that
astronomers Tycho Brahe (1546-1601) and Jo- of the Czech Brethren and the Utraquists, that of
hannes Kepler (1571-1630), the composers Philip the Calvinist princes plotting against the Habsburg
de Monte (1521-1603) and the nobleman-musi- monarchy, or that of the ultra-Catholic Philip II
cian Christoph Harant (1564-1621). Rudolf’s con- of Spain and the papal nuncios whom Rudolf’s
suming interest was in his collections, perhaps mother had installed in Prague. The Bohemian
the richest and most varied of his time. Inspired by Estates (nobility) were largely Protestant, and they
his father’s collecting and by that of his uncle put pressure on the Catholic emperors by withold-
Ferdinand II of the Tirol (1529-1595), Rudolf ing taxes to support the war against the Turks.
assembled a Kunstkammer which filled four large Political unrest drove Rudolf increasingly into the
rooms of the Hradéany Castle in Prague, as well as Catholic camp, until the Estates forced him to sign
a large library (mostly kept in the Hofburg, Vienna) a “Letter of Majesty” (1609) proclaiming religious
and an art collection that included about 3000 freedom. Rudolf II lost all support in 1611, after a
paintings. Among artists of the past, Rudolf col- Catholic mercenary army had ravaged the country-
lected especially Diirer and Jan Brueghel. The liv- side and invaded Prague.
ing artists whom he patronized included Giuseppe Rudolf’s lack of enthusiasm for any particular
Arcimboldo (1527-1593), Georg Hoefnagel (15 42- Christian sect was certainly due also to his hermetic
1600), Adriaen de Vries (1545-1626), Bartolo- and esoteric inclinations. His private convictions
maeus Spranger (1546-1611), Hans von Aachen are unknown, but all his voluntary activities point
(1552-1615), Josef Heintz Sr. (1564-1609), Roe- to a pansophic attitude, embracing the wisdom and
lant Savery (1576?-1639), the hard-stone carver beauty to be found in the widest range of spiritual
Ottavio Miseroni (1560?-1624), and the engraver and material creations. Central to this was the phi-
Aegidius Sadeler (1570?-1629). The loosely-knit losophy and, to a lesser degree, the practice of >
“Prague School” cultivated two main areas: alchemy. Among the alchemists who flourished at
mythological subjects with an erotic atmosphere, Rudolf’s court, sometimes in the function of physi-
and naturalistic representations of plants, animals, cians, were Martin Ruland Sr. (1532-1602) and Jr.
birds, and landscapes. The Kunstkammer con- (1569-1611), > Heinrich Khunrath (1560-1605),
tained natural wonders from the animal, vegetable, > Michael Maier (1568-1622), Michael Sendi-
and mineral realms; artefacts from non-European vogius (1556-post 1630), Nicholas Barnaud
countries; historically significant objects and antiq- (15 38/39-after 1600), and Oswald Croll (ca. 15 60-
uities; works of art in precious materials (silver, 1609). ~ Giordano Bruno made a short visit
gold, gems, hard stone); automata, machines, and in 1588. The Jewish community in Prague was a

--- Page 446 ---
RUDOLF II TO22
center for Lurianic Kabbalistic studies [> Jewish Saint-Germain, Le Comte de, * year and
Influences], especially under Rabbi Judah Low place unknown, + 26.2.1784
(15202-1609) who met with the Emperor in 1592. Eckernforde
Rudolf’s confessor Pistorius edited the important
collection Artis Cabalisticae, hoc est reconditae theo- Referred to by Frederick the Great as ‘a man
logiae et philosophiae scriptorum Tomus I (1587). whose mystery has never been solved’, the first evi-
+ John Dee and Edward Kelley spent the period dence we have of Saint-Germain’s existence is a let-
1583-1589 in Bohemia and Central Europe, first at ter by him, dated 22 November 1735 and sent from
the invitation of the Polish magnate Olbracht Laski The Hague (British Library; Sloane MSS 4026, ff.
(1536-1605). In 1584 Dee secured an audience 289r-290Vv); it is addressed to Sir Hans Sloane, to
with Rudolf, but the mention of angel-magic whom the author offers an incunable. Next we hear
alarmed the superstitious Emperor, and, still more, of him as being in London, at a time when the inva-
his Jesuit supervisors. Dee and Kelley were expelled sion by the young Pretender caused foreigners to be
from Prague and found protection with Vilém arrested. He acknowledges passing under a ficti-
Rozmberk until 1589, when Dee returned to Eng- tious name and title, and says he will disclose his
land. Kelley then enjoyed two years of Rudolf’s real identity to the king only. We do not know
favor, but ended his life in prison. whether George II ever received him, but around
Rudolf’s “melancholic” (or manic-depressive) the spring of the following year we find Saint-Ger-
temperament made life difficult for himself and for main as a prominent personality in London musi-
others. He had a romantic view of Empire and of cal circles. He composed a considerable amount of
the glory of his Habsburg ancestors, especially music, largely Italian-style and operatic (preserved
Maximilian I, but could not handle the political in the British Library), and played the violin. Leav-
realities of his own time. His failure to marry and ing England, he disappears from view for some
produce an heir was one result of this. However, he years, to resurface in 1756 at the court of Louis XV.
had a long relationship with Anna Maria Strada, Concerned that France was heading for bank-
the daughter of his court antiquary Ottavio Strada, ruptcy, he disadvised from seeking loans from for-
who bore him five or six children. The fanaticisms eign powers and so incurring further debts; and he
of others drove him either to uncharacteristic and said that for purposes of export he would donate a
poorly-judged decisions, or else to abnegation of collection of dyes of extraordinary brilliance, a yel-
his responsibilities. Then he would retreat into his low metal called “Similor” and the secret of a
collecting, commissioning, arranging, and experi- process for removing flaws from diamonds. Al-
menting, where he was the undisputed master of though he said that the latter worked by chemical
his world. After centuries of misunderstanding, means, the procedure was widely believed to be
this private world and the constellation of talents occult in nature. The fact that Saint-Germain used
that it attracted has been given its due as a kind of to decline invitations to dine, even at the King’s
Hermetic utopia. table, gave birth to the legend that he lived without
eating — actually he was a vegetarian — and his
Lit.: R.J.W. Evans, The Making of the Habsburg
interest in finding a way to increase the human life-
Monarchy 1550-1700: An Interpretation, Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1979 @ idem, Rudolf II and his span bred the rumour that he himself had lived
World: A Study in Intellectual History 1576-1612 since antiquity. The less credulous supposed that he
[1973], corrected ed., London: Thames & Hudson, was the illegitimate son of some royal lady, and
1997 @ Eliska Fucikova et al., Rudolf II and Prague: that this was the information he had told the king.
The Imperial Court and Residential City as the Cul- Saint-Germain was urging that France must cease
tural and Spiritual Heart of Central Europe, Prague/
its ruinous war with England, where he had good
London/Milan: Prague Castle Administration, Thames
contacts. He believed that the English king would & Hudson, Skira Editore, 1997 @ Eros und Mythos:
Kunst am Hof Rudolfs II, Vienna: Kunsthistorisches welcome peace, and actually went to The Hague to
Museum, 1995 Prag um 1600: Beitrége zur Kunst try and negotiate for peace with the English
und Kultur am Hofe Rudolfs II, 2 vols., Freren: Luca Ambassador there. However, Louis XV’s prime
Verlag, 1988. minister Choiseul tried to get him arrested and he
had to flee. In Belgium, Saint-Germain sold a
JOSCELYN GODWIN Raphael to raise money for starting a dyeing busi-
ness, but tariffs turned out to be too high.
Russell, George William > AE His real identity remains a mystery. To Karl
Alexander, Margraf of Anspach, he said that his
Rupescissa, Johannes de > father was Prince Rakoczy II of Transylvania; but
Roquetaillade, Jean de Rakoczy had only three, legitimate sons, and their

--- Page 447 ---
1023 SAINT-GERMAIN
histories are known. In Prussia, Princess Amelia, offshoots such as the > Church Universal and Tri-
Frederick the Great’s sister, tried to tease the secret umphant. > H.P. Blavatsky first referred to Saint-
out of him, and he replied that he came from a land Germain in her Isis Unveiled (1877), and followed
that had never known foreign occupations, with a this up in an article ‘Count de Saint-Germain’, in
royal lineage as long as the Bourbons. Only the The Theosophist of May 1881. This was the year in
Wittelsbach dynasty of Bavaria could make such a which A.P. Sinnett received, in Simla, a letter sup-
boast. The person who knew Saint-Germain best posedly written by the Master Koot Hoomi, which
was his last host, Prince Carl von Hessen-Cassel, referred to Saint-Germain as continuator of the
Governor of Schleswig, and a Freemason. He con- teachings of Christian Rosenkreutz (see Mahatma
sidered Saint-Germain one of the greatest philoso- Letters, 280). Isobel Cooper-Oakley’s first articles
phers who had ever lived; and in his Mémoires de about Saint-Germain appeared in the November
mon temps (1861) he says that his friend was and December issues of The Theosophical Review
indeed the son of Rakoczy II of Transylvania, born (1897). Cooper-Oakley was interested in Saint-
from his ‘first wife’ but brought up in Florence by Germain’s possible masonic connections, and asked
Gian de’ Medici. In fact Rakoczy married only » Annie Besant to get into occult contact with him.
once; however, at the age of seventeen he spent four Besant at first did not think this would be possible,
months in Florence, where he was in contact with a but in 1898, while she was alone in her room in
Princess Violante, of Wittelsbach descent, brought Avenue Road and preparing to go to bed, Saint-
from Bavaria to marry Gian’s homosexual brother. Germain appeared to her, told her to take a pencil,
If the two had a child, the two stories about Saint- and said ‘Rakoczi’. Besant was given to understand
Germain’s ancestry could be combined; and one that in earlier existences he had been Christian
imagines that Gian could have spared an incunable Rosenkreutz, Hunyadi Janos (a 15th-century Mag-
and a Raphael as gifts to the boy who had been yar hero from the Rumanian part of Transylvania)
given into his charge. and Lord [Francis] > Bacon (Besant, ‘The Theo-
From the perspective of the history of Western sophical Society and its Work’, The Adyar Bulletin,
esotericism, the historical Saint-Germain becomes nov. 1823, 445-446). In the journal The Link of
submerged in the career of the mythical persona. A the Theosophical Society’s Esoteric School, Besant
book of alchemical contents, La Trés Sainte Tri- wrote in February 1909 that Saint-Germain was
nosophie (The Most Holy Trinosophy; with illus- one of the seven Masters; and at the occasion of his
trations in colours), from the end of the 18th first initiation, on 11 January 1910, Jiddu Krishna-
century, several times newly edited until the present murti saw ‘Master the Count’ together with the six
time, has been persistently attributed to him others. He again saw ‘the Count’ on 12 June, 1911,
(although it is not from his pen) and has in no small when Besant was giving a lecture at the Sorbonne.
measure contributed to his fame. Legends circulat- In her book The Masters (1918), Besant described
ing about Saint-Germain were fostered to a large Saint-Germain as having previously incarnated as
extent by Baron Carl Heinrich von Gleichen’s ‘Rakocsi’ (she keeps to this spelling according to
Denkwiirdigkeiten (Memories; 1847). Gleichen Rakoczy’s autobiography, the Latin of which has no
gives a vivid narrative of how he met him. The “y”), Bacon, Robertus the Monk (who has resisted
chapter he devotes to Saint-Germain, followed by attempts at identification), Hunyadi Janos and
others dealing with > Cagliostro, > Lavater, > Christian Rosenkreutz. She claimed that he was
Saint-Martin and the Marchioness de La Croix, now living in Hungary, and traveled much.
was to be repeatedly copied or adapted. It is not ~ Alice Bailey’s Arcane School was a breakaway
surprising that the figure of Saint-Germain had from the Theosophical Society, but Bailey had been
already been used in works of fiction, for instance a member of the Esoteric School; in her Initiation:
in Pushkin’s The Queen ofSpades (1834), where he Human and Solar (1922), she refers to the ‘head of
is in the possession of a card-game winning for- the seventh ray’ as ‘The MasterR...... > — pre-
mula, and more importantly in Sir > Edward sumably this is Saint-Germain. > C.W. Leadbeater,
Bulwer-Lytton’s celebrated “rosicrucian” novel in The Masters and the Path (1925), extended the
Zanoni (1842), where he appears as a foil to list of the Master’s incarnations: St. Alban, Proclus,
Zanoni, the hero of the story. Later again, in Rainer ~ Roger Bacon, Christian Rosenkreutz, Hunyadi
Maria Rilke’s fictional autobiography Die Aufze- Janos, and Francis Bacon. And in The Hidden Life
ichnungen des Malte Laurids Brigge (The Note- in Freemasonry (1928), he left out St. Alban but
books of Malte Laurids Brigge, 1910), he appears added a 1oth-century figure, Baron Hompesch.
under the name of Marquis von Belmare. Leadbeater claimed to have met Saint-Germain in
Saint-Germain could hardly have been ignored by 1901, walking down the Corso in Rome in modern
modern Theosophy [> Theosophical Society] and dress. Presumably he meant Saint-Germain in his

--- Page 448 ---
1024
SAINT-GERMAIN
latest incarnation, for the body in which he walked Important Mystic and Philosopher who influenced the
around the court of Louis XV lies buried beneath 18th century (orig. 1912, 1927), Kessinger Reprints,
1997 Jean Overton Fuller, The Comte de Saint-
the floor of the Nicolaikirche in Eckernforde. The
Germain, Last Scion of the House of Rakoczy,
civic authorities were so conscious of burying ‘the London, 1988 Carl Heinrich von Gleichen, Denk-
man who never dies’ that they listed the possessions wiirdigkeiten, Leipzig, 1847 # Manley P. Hall, An
he left behind, down to number of razor blades, Encyclopedic Outline of Masonic, Hermetic, Kabbalis-
within the case and without. tic and Rosicrucian Philosophy, Being an Interpreta-
+ Manley P. Hall’s influential and repeatedly tion of the Secret Teachings concealed within the
Rituals, Allegories and Mysteries of All Ages, San Fran-reprinted book An Encyclopedic Outline of
cisco: H.S. Crocker Cy, 1928, esp. CXCIX-CC ¢ Pierre
Masonic, Hermetic, Kabbalistic and Rosicrucian
Lhermier, Le Mystérieux Comte de Saint-Germain,
Philosophy (1928) opens with a large “portrait” Paris, 1943 @ Jean Mourra & Paul Louvet, Saint-Ger-
(by J. Augustus Knapp) of Saint-Germain in colour, main, le Rose-Croix Immortel, Paris, 1934 # Gerard
and contains elements which were instrumental in Abraham van Rijnberk, Saint-Germain in de brieven
further spreading legends around this figure. Hall van sijn tijdgenoot den Prins Karel van Hesse-Cassel,
also gave a new English edition, with his own com- Den Haag, 1944 @ Episodes de la vie ésotérique 1780-
mentaries, of The Most Holy Trinosophy of the 1824, Lyon: Derain, 1949, 194-224 @ Auguste Viatte
Les Sources Occultes du Romantisme, vol. 1, Paris:
Comte De St.-Germain (see above).
Champion, 1928, 201-203 # G.B. Volz, Der Graf von
Saint-Germain continues to inspire novelists, the Saint-Germain, Dresden, 1923 (credits every spurious
most celebrated contemporary one being Chelsea source) @ Chelsea Quinn Yarbro, The Count de Saint-
Quinn Yarbro. Her series of best-sellers which con- Germain’s Series, 9 vols. (novels), New York: Tor, St.
stitute The Count de Saint-Germain’s Series in nine Martin’s Timescape Pocket, 1979-1993.
volumes (1979 to 1993) have for their main hero
our personage, the Count of Saint-Germain of the JEAN OVERTON FULLER
18th century, still very much alive. In Yarbro’s
highly syncretistic fiction, several themes are com- Saint-Martin, Louis-Claude de,
bined, like those of vampirism, the mysterious sav- * 18.1.1743 Amboise, t 13.10.1803
iour (in the wake of Bulwer-Lytton’s Zanoni), and Aulnay (near Paris)
not least, > alchemy.
1. LIFE AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT
MSS: London: British Library, Sloane MSS, Egerton 2. THE “GREAT WORK” OF REINTEGRATION
MSS, Additional MSS Public Record Office. State
3. MAGISM/IMAGINATION 4. LANGUAGE AND
Papers, Foreign Ambassadors, Intercepted. Paris: Mi-
nistére des Affaires Etrangers, Angleterre, Hollande, POETICS 5. CHRISTOLOGY 6. HISTORY
France Ministére de la Culture et de la Communica- 7. ARITHMOLOGY
tion, Archives Nationales.
The Hague: Koninklijke Bibliotheek, Bentinck Papers 1. LIFE AND INTELLECTUAL
¢ Vienna: Hof- und Staatsarchiv, Despeches of Reis- DEVELOPMENT
bach in 1760 and of Cobenzl in 1763 to Kaunitz,
Saint-Martin, who published under the pseudo-
his replies thereto and letters to Maria Theresa and
nym of “the Unknown Philosopher”, was born hers to Prince Charles of Lorraine Merseburg Zen-
trales Staatsarchiv, Despatches of Hellen and into a pious family of the minor nobility. He stud-
Knyphausen in 1760 and of Alvensleben in 1777 to ied law, and practised briefly, but gave it up
Frederick II and his replies thereto and a letter of Saint- (although the theme of justice permeates his theos-
Germain to Frederick II # Wolfenbuttel, Herzog ophy) at age twenty-two, for a military career. The
August Bibliothek, Letters of Bischoffwerder, Bosch. principal attraction of the life of a military officer —
Frolich, Karl of Kurland. Frederick of Brunswick ¢
he received, thanks to the duc de Choiseul, a com-
Copenhagen: Den Danske Frimuerorder, Correspon-
dence of Prince Carl and Willermoz # Krakow: Uni- mission as a lieutenant in the regiment of Foix —
versitet Jagiellonski. Sammlung Varmhagen, Letters of was the leisure it allowed him for philosophical and
Prince Carl to Haugwitz @ [Pseudo-Saint-Germain], La literary studies. Saint-Martin systematically read
Tres Sainte Trinosophie (MS Bibliothéque Municipale his way through Enlightenment philosophy, but
de Troyes, call number 2400), ed. as The most Holy without finding therein satisfactory answers to the
Trinosophia of the Count of St.-Germain (Manley P.
problem of human destiny. He found an alternative
Hall, ed.), Los Angeles: The Philosophical Research
Society, s.d. (ca. 1925). solution through some of his fellow officers who
were initiates of the Order of > Elus-Coéns, a
Lit.: Paul Chacornac, The Comte de Saint-Germain, masonic Rite (or System) comprised of High
Paris, 1947, repr. 1982 @ Isobel Cooper-Oakley, The degrees only, and devoted essentially to theurgical
Count of Saint-Germain: The Life and Activities of an practices founded by > Martinés de Pasqually

--- Page 449 ---
1025 SAINT-MARTIN
(1727-1774). Martinés’ wife, in fact, was the niece explains the physical world by its relation to hu-
of the major of the regiment of Foix. Sometime manity and, ultimately, God. In the Fall that which
between August and October 1768 Saint-Martin exists in principle immaterial was sensibilized under
received initiation into the Order. He quickly rose material forms; nevertheless, everything tends to
through the grades. From 1768 to 1771 Saint-Mar- reenter into the unity from which it emerged. The
tin worked, at Bordeaux, as secretary to Martinés Fall divided and obscured the virtues or moral and
himself. It is during this time that he acquired intellectual faculties proper to humanity; we must
detailed knowledge of the Order’s practice. Mar- work, by revivifying our will by desire, to recover
tinés’ > Illuminism centred on the existence and those from which we have been alienated. Through
theurgic cultivation of superior, primarily angelic, this regeneration, which can operate only by virtue
powers. Saint-Martin’s duties included organizing of the sacrificial act of the Réparateur, physical
Martinés’ papers and copying the ritual manuals in nature is also regenerated, and the universe as a
which were set out the ceremonial > magic by whole reattains the Edenic condition.
which the adept attains illumination and — the ulti- With the success of his first book, Saint-Martin
mate goal of Masonic theosophy — recovers the became the apostle of Illuminism to the beau
primitive faculties possessed by Adam before the monde. His task was to lead humanity to the super-
Fall. His secretarial duties brought him into con- natural things that belong to it by right, but of
tact with > J.-B. Willermoz, leader of the Lodge of which Saint-Martin’s generation has lost totally the
Coéns at Lyons. In 1771, at age twenty-eight, idea. He saw himself as a ‘cleanser of the temple of
Saint-Martin resigned from his regiment in order to truth’, in opposition to both Enlightenment ration-
devote himself to the study and propagation of Illu- alism and orthodox Christianity in which the letter
minism. Living, principally at Paris and Lyons, in of Scripture appeared to be valued over the spirit.
the company of esoteric Masons such as the comte In his ministry he allied himself with a wide range
d’Hauterive, l’abbé Fournié, and Willermoz, he of fellow-minded personalities: an interest in >
spent his time gathering notes for a book, and animal magnetism brought him into contact with
improving his meditation and practice. the Marquis de Puységur and the Société de I’Har-
At Lyons, living under Willermoz’ roof, Saint- monte of esoteric Mesmerism; he met > William
Martin wrote his first book, Des erreurs et de la Law on a trip to London in 1787; and at Stras-
vérité, ou Les hommes rappelés au Principe uni- bourg he made the acquaintance of the Swedish
versel de la science (1775). This work develops a baron Silferhielm, the nephew of > Emanuel Swe-
theosophical system in which the ideas of Martinés denborg, who interested him in his uncle’s ideas. In
de Pasqually are transformed into an original sys- fact, Saint-Martin wrote Le nouvel homme (1792)
tem. Des erreurs et de la vérité, in presenting a phi- under the immediate influence of Swedenborg,
losophy of nature, of society, and of knowledge, although from the very beginning he was highly
offers a wide-ranging critique of secular Enlighten- critical of the Swedish visionary. The fundamental
ment reason. Its immediate occasion was Nicolas- idea of this work is that we carry in ourselves a sort
Antoine Boulanger’s assertion, in L’Antiquité of text, of which our entire life ought to be the
dévoilée par ses usages (1766), that religions were development, because the soul is primitively a
born of the terrified imaginations of survivors of Thought of God. We must renew ourselves by reen-
the great Flood and allied calamities whose capac- tering into our true nature.
ity for rational thought had been destroyed by the Ina letter to Willermoz, dated 4 July 1790, Saint-
horrors of the natural catastrophes they had wit- Martin asks to be struck off the masonic registers.
nessed. Saint-Martin counters that religion is a This request signals a profound reorientation of
supernatural gift by which the divine mercy con- Saint-Martin’s theosophy. It is easily explained: he
tinues to transmit its wisdom to those who can per- had, during his residency in Strasbourg between
ceive it. He argues that the true cause of, not only 1788 and 1791, discovered the works of > Jacob
religion, but also social institutions, natural laws, Boehme (1575-1624). Credit for introducing Saint-
and human nature itself is an active, intelligent be- Martin to Boehme’s writings goes to > Friedrich-
ing. Saint-Martin’s second book, Tableau naturel Rudolf Saltzmann, a Freemason theosopher, and
des rapports qui existent entre Dieu, ’homme, et Madame de Boecklin. In Boehme, who was little
l’'univers (1782), structured as a theosophical ver- known in France, Saint-Martin found a theosophy
sion of the design argument for the existence of of human regeneration: if we are not renewed in
God, continues Saint-Martin’s attack on Enlighten- our essence, we will not attain true understanding.
ment philosophy. Whereas the Enlightenment ex- According to Boehme, this second birth is magical,
plained humanity by material factors, Saint-Martin although this magic has nothing to do with theurgy.

--- Page 450 ---
1026
SAINT-MARTIN
It is Wisdom, namely the divine Sophia herself, the conveyer of Boehme’s thought. While he achieved a
symbol of absolute purity, who enables us to be profound understanding of Boehme’s theosophy,
born to true life, whereas spirits such as those Saint-Martin was an original thinker in his own
which the Order of Elus Coéns claimed to subdue right, and was responding to a historical situation
in order to gain knowledge evolve in a sphere that differed considerably from that of Boehme.
where the impure mingles with the divine. Under The result was a set of works deeply marked by
the influence of Boehme, Saint-Martin moved Boehme yet original, principally L’Homme de
steadily away from Martinés’ theurgical practice. désir, 1790 (later revised editions), Le Ministére de
He now rejected, as set out in Ecce Homo (1792), V’homme-esprit, 1802, and De l’esprit des choses,
commerce with the intermediary beings of the ou Coup d’oeil philosophique sur la nature des
astral realm through the theurgic ritual of the Elus étres et sur l’objet de leur existence, 2 vols., 1802.
Coéns, as well as other marvels of a lower order, To this list of works of exposition should be added
such as magnetic somnabulism or Swedenborgian his “theosophical” novel, Le Crocodile. It is on
visions, insisting instead that reintegration is to be these works that rests Saint-Martin’s reputation as
achieved through imitation of Christ in the manner the most inspired and the most powerful theoso-
of Boehme’s The Way to Christ (1624). Neverthe- pher in the French language.
less, Saint-Martin did not renounce Martines Saint-Martin’s sense of himself as fulfilling a
entirely; the latter’s principal idea of the man-God, vocation in direct opposition to the spirit of the
or the human being understood as minister and times made him sometimes feel isolated in the
cooperator with the divine will and charged with midst of a hostile world. He described himself as
the soteriological mission of restoring the perfec- the Robinson Crusoe of spirituality awaiting the
tion of his original destiny, always remained fun- ship that will take him far from his exile. At times
damental to Saint-Martin’s thought. this sentiment of isolation brought him to the edge
Saint-Martin initially encountered Boehme of despair, but for the most part Saint-Martin was
through English translations republished in the 18th able to remain optimistic, buoyed by his conviction
century and edited by William Law. He learned that while his mission faces numerous obstacles
German in order to tackle the original texts, and set and appears to proceed very slowly, it will be
himself to translating Boehme into French. He was crowned with glorious success after his death.
assisted in mastering Boehme by a Swiss theoso- Saint-Martin was not, like Willermoz, a creator
pher, > Niklaus Anton Kirchberger, baron of of masonic Rites, nor did he cultivate disciples in
Liebisdorf, who became his pen friend and his the narrow sense of the term. One should not, how-
dearest disciple for the rest of his life, although they ever, conclude from this that his influence was
never met in person. Not only did Kirchberger help short-lived or limited in scope. Saint-Martin’s
him on specific matters of translation, their episto- works were read, translated, and commented upon
lary discussions deepened his understanding of the all over Europe, in Russia and Germany as in
essence of Boehme’s teaching. With Kirchberger France. Saint-Martin’s influence encouraged French
Saint-Martin discovered a range of esoteric writers interest in not just Boehme but the entire tradition
of whom he had hitherto been unaware: Madame of German thought from Weigel and Schwenckfeld
Guyon, > baron von Eckhartshausen, > Heinrich to Gichtel. He deeply marked French esoteric
Jung-Stilling, English philadelphes like > Jane thought as both the popularizer of Boehme and as
Lead, > John Pordage, and Thomas Bromley, dis- an original theosopher in his own right. In Ger-
ciples of Boehme such as > Johann Georg Gichtel, many itself, surprisingly, Saint-Martin played a
and Protestant spiritualists from the time of the role in reintroducing Boehme through the dual
Reformation, such as Caspar Schwenkfeld and > medium of German translations of his work and
Valentin Weigel. Of this group, it was Gichtel who Franz von Baader’s promotion of his principal
had the most notable influence on Saint-Martin. ideas. In Russia, an Illuminism heavily indebted to
Saint-Martin considered the German thought Saint-Martin flourished under Emperess Catherine
of his day —- particularly that with its roots in II. Beyond esoteric circles, Saint-Martin is the
Boehme — to be deeper, and much less tainted by major intermediary through whom Illuminism
Enlightenment materialism than French philoso- reached the early roth century. Balzac (Louis Lam-
phy. In the years that followed, Saint-Martin bert [1833], Le Livre mystique [1834-1835]) and
understood his vocation to be that of interpreting > Joseph de Maistre (Soirées de Saint-Péterbourg,
Boehme for the French-speaking world and for his Entretien XI) attest to his influence. His greatest
generation. Yet, Saint-Martin was not merely a impact, however, was on > Romanticism; Martin-

--- Page 451 ---
1027 SAINT-MARTIN
ist ideas and themes recur throughout Romantic gion by bathing humanity in these very divine
writings on poetics, the > imagination, epistemol- mysteries.
ogy, and philosophy of history. The reintegration of humanity carries with it the
regeneration of nature. De l’esprit des choses con-
2. ORME GREAT: WORK? OF siders humanity, as a living mirror, to be a reflection
REINTEGRATION of divinity. By giving oneself over to meditation,
Saint-Martin’s theosophy is an epic of fall and and renouncing, by the will, all external things, one
rehabilitation. The history of humanity begins operates and obtains intimate knowledge of the
from the prévarication (a term Saint-Martin bor- Prototype, or of the Word, of which the human
rowed from Martinés de Pasqually to designate the being is originally the image and the type. This
metaphysical Fall of humanity) in which humanity knowledge not only reveals God to the human
lost the perfection of its primordial state in which it being, it also reveals our proper relation to Nature.
participated in the divine pleroma. Saint-Martin By placing ourselves in harmony with our Princi-
teaches that humanity subsists in a state of forget- ple, we also place ourselves in harmony with origi-
fulness of its true nature owing to the Fall, but that nal Nature (Boehme’s Eternal Nature). Present-day
its true intellectual (i.e., spiritual) nature renders it Nature, fallen and divided in itself and in human-
susceptible to receive the light emanating from the ity, nevertheless preserves in its laws, as humanity
divine intelligence that permeates the universe. in many of his faculties, a disposition to reenter
Fallen humanity, which retains the germ of the into the original unity. By this double relation,
image of Divinity within itself, must draw out its Nature is put in harmony with humanity to the
divine life from under the bondage of its fallen sta- extent that humanity coordinates with its own
tus by reorienting its will, still free despite the Fall, Principle. In this way the “Great Work” of reinte-
with the divine will. Through contemplation (the gration restores Nature, as well as humanity, to its
soul as mirror — mirrors being living, organic prelapsarian state. De l’esprit des choses, a rare
reflections of the divine image, from whose recip- example of French > Naturphilosophie, greatly
rocal play we know ourselves and reassemble a interested the German Naturphilosophen.
shattered, dispersed world into unity), humanity
can awaken to consciousness of its true nature and 3. MAGISM/IMAGINATION
to the circulation of spiritual forces through the Magism operates, in Saint-Martin’s theosophy,
universe. Sensible objects are signs of a hidden spir- on three levels: divine, natural, and human. On the
itual reality. Saint-Martin calls souls who, moved divine level, God manifests or reveals himself exter-
by desire for God, acquire knowledge of the in- nally through the Sophia, but additionally through
terior truths hommes de désir. These “men of other mirrors, requiring in their turn new mirrors
aspiration” imitate Christ both in incarnating con- in which they are reflected. Saint-Martin calls the
sciousness of the Word (divine truths) and in expi- circulation of spiritual forces through the universe
ating the fallen world through sacrificial suffering. by means of the multiplication of mirrors “divine
Their self-immolation having separated them from magism”. This divine magism both reveals to
the material kingdom, they exercise a spiritual min- humanity the reflections of the eternal mag-
istry by regenerating others through their sacrifice. nificence and, through its action on our hearts,
Once a critical mass of “men of desire” has been inspires love for it, though in such a way that we
achieved, the homme-esprit, or corporate regener- cannot appropriate the principle to ourselves
ated humanity, is created. Le Ministére de l’homme- (Divinity remains ineffable to creation).
esprit is to complete the regeneration of humanity On the level of Nature, there is a triple magism.
through the radical development of its intimate The first, more or less identical with divine magism,
essence. The identity Saint-Martin posits between is divine generation itself, or the filtering through
the regenerated human will and the divine will the veil of things as much of the spiritual forces as
makes it possible for humanity to reattain its true created beings can sustain. This is the capacity that
end and become once again the image of God. The pre-fallen Nature has to manifest God. But Nature
attainment of this glorious future is the “Great is no longer in its original state; like humanity, it is
Work” of reintegration. Like his Enlightenment fallen. Hence, another magism, the universal-pres-
opponents, Saint-Martin refuses to see humanity ent, must be exercised in order to protect against
as an abject creature humbled before the divine the Evil Principle and remove the horror and infec-
mysteries of the universe, yet at the same time tion with which the fall has tainted our suffering. In
he rejects the Enlightenment repudiation of reli- fact, however, the natural magism of the present

--- Page 452 ---
1028
SAINT-MARTIN
universe is in its principle identical to the natural the Fall, was natural in the proper sense because its
magism of the original universe; it differs only in words responded to the essence of the things they
the realm in which it operates. In addition, each named. Present-day languages, in which words no
individual entity in the natural world also has its longer have an evident relation to the things that
particular magism; each flower, each animal, as a they designate, are as they are because of the Fall.
medium between its tangible properties and the Language, like humanity itself, has suffered an exile
invisible and intangible properties that are in its from its original state. The rehabilitation of hu-
principle of life, is an image of the eternal and orig- manity is linked to the recovery of the original, uni-
inal medium of divine generation. The third natu- versal, divinely natural language of humanity. This
ral magism is distinct and, as a consequence of the recovery is possible because something of the orig-
fall, works against the divine forces. It is called inal language remains in our degenerate languages.
astral magism. Under the influence of its disor- This something is the ability of language to express
derly and irregular images, our spiritual and phys- the universal faculties of the Supreme Principle,
ical being alike can be seduced from our true not directly or literally, to be sure, but indirectly
destination. through > correspondences, symbols, figures, and
Saint-Martin calls the human form of magism allegories. This indirect speech, or poetry, partici-
the > imagination. Its original role was to make pates in the divine powers, thereby linking human-
ever more beautiful, ever more perfect the sphere ity to God and grasping the unity of creation.
wherein humanity lived. This imagination remains Through poetry, an enduring echo of the universal
with us despite the Fall. Discerning the spiritual language, humanity becomes the lyre of God. True
glory hidden under the appearances of sensible poetry, finally, must display a historical aspect
nature, the imagination is the spiritual part of because the relationship of humanity to God — the
humanity that possesses the vision of all things. subject of poetry — is the historical drama of the
Everything is a symbol in our world; physical Fall and the regeneration to come (hence, its
objects are the visible signs of invisible forces on historical aspect includes a prophetic element).
which they depend. Through imagination we grasp Saint-Martin’s poetic ideal is lyric, metaphysical,
the spiritual unity of the universe. In Saint-Martin’s narrative, and edifying; in short, the epic of Fall
anthropology, the imagination is not one faculty and rehabilitation.
among others, but a primary vocation as the duty Two consequences emerge from Saint-Martin’s
and power of reflecting, or making real, of propa- theories of language and poetics. First, he asserts
gating and re-creating. The term “mirror”, then, the idea of a poetic priesthood. Primitive poetry, he
linked as it is to magism and imagination, does not says, was religious in character; the history of
connote passive reflection, but an active concen- poetry has been a long decadence, a descent toward
trating and focusing that causes germination and terrestrial subjects and futility. Poetry, which has
growth, the passing from dispersal to the unity of fallen by making itself into a simple translation of
the human being. Just as, however, astral magism the passions or imitator of things, must take up
opposes the good natural magisms, so there is a again its primitive function as a celebration of the
negative human imagination, or a faculty of repre- Principle of our grandeur. Poetry has a privileged
senting to ourselves chimerical beings or composite function in the relation of humanity to God
monstrosities that stand against the plan of har- because it is, of all human productions, that which
mony and universal restoration. One must cast the most reconciles us with our Principle, and which,
negative magism aside in order to become the mir- by the feelings it evokes, best proves to us the dig-
ror of God and of Nature. nity of our origin. The second consequence relates
to the limits of communication. The Illuminist or
4. LANGUAGE AND POETICS sacred poet, by virtue of a transcendant intuition,
Saint-Martin, like many of his contemporaries, has become the depositary of the truth. He is
argues for a natural origin of language, as opposed charged with communicating this truth to his con-
to a conventional origin. But by natural origin he temporaries, but the communicative effort collides
does not mean that which Enlightenment phi- with the limits of communication. That which
losophes meant by it; that is, that language was can be said literally is fallen; the truth can only
born out of the necessities imposed by our terres- be hinted at because of the degeneration of our
trial condition. Languages of such an origin do language. Poetic language attempts to say the
exist — Saint-Martin points to the idioms spoken by unsayable by means of correspondences, symbols,
savages — but they are animal languages. The true figures, and analogies. The deeper a spiritual truth
primitive language of humanity, that spoken before one tries to express, the more one must resort to

--- Page 453 ---
1029 SAINT-MARTIN
these circumlocutions.The secret possessed by the philosophiques et religieuses sur la Révolution
Illuminist or poet is secret or esoteric, not by his francaise (1795). He returned to the social lessons
choice, but because the truth that grips him cannot, of the Revolution two years later in Eclair sur l’as-
by its very nature, be put into circulation under a sociation humaine. Le Crocodile (1799), his novel
form accessible to all. treating the period leading up to the upheaval, is
also relevant to Saint-Martin’s understanding of
Gr GH RUST OMROIGIY. the Revolution.
Saint-Martin taught that reintegration is possible History, for Saint-Martin, begins with the Fall.
because humanity retains a spark of its divine ori- Since, as for Milton, the way back is barred, history
gin, and, moved by desire for God, can acquire is not a question of returning to a past, but of con-
knowledge of the interior truths. The various reli- quering a future. Historical events are signs of
gious traditions of the world, as well as the Bible, the “Great Work” of reintegration. Saint-Martin
confirm for the “man of desire” the truths that he teaches that post-lapsarian humanity is possessed
finds within himself. Nevertheless, Christ retains a by nostalgia for its origin, and constantly seeks,
unique and necessary role in the process of reinte- without being aware of the true cause of its search,
gration because fallen humanity retains the possi- an ideal harmonious socio-political order in which
bility of reintegration only thanks to Christ, the to develop itself in its truth and its plenitude. The
divine Réparateur. Christ’s sacrifice renders our quest for such an order governs history. Saint-Mar-
suffering efficacious and gives us a new life. Echoing tin interprets the socio-political life of humanity as
St. Paul, Saint-Martin insists that the Réparateur a sequence of violent and convulsive efforts, which
must be both divine and human since humanity he calls crises, toward harmony. Crises, analogous
could not be regenerated if Christ had been solely a to the delirium of the sick person whose convul-
human Réparateur, while if the Réparateur had not sions are at once signs of the illness and of struggle
become human the path of suffering would never against the illness, are simultaneously signs of the
have been opened and all suffering would have desire for reintegration and of progress toward
been in vain. Though Saint-Martin accepts that the reintegration. Crises assist the work of reintegra-
restoration of fallen humanity began to take form tion both because they add to the suffering that is
at the moment of the Fall, whence the constant part of the reintegrative process and because they
presence of the divine in history, he insists that sal- provide ideal conditions for the reactivation of the
vation must await Christ. Christ’s sacrifice culmi- primitive faculties of rapidity and energy char-
nates the history of bloody sacrificial réparateurs of acteristic of humanity in its primordial state but
pre-Christian religions and societies and transforms possessed only in potential since the Fall. The Rev-
humanity by offering the possibility of rebirth into olutionary crisis, in particular, reactivates these
a new life. Nevertheless, transformed humanity primitive faculties and thus marks a new origin for
extends and will eventually complete Christ’s work humanity. Not only is this positive spiritual evolu-
and bring about reintegration. Through imitation tion irreversible, it will be extended to other
of Christ, “men of desire” are not only redeemed nations through the spread of the Revolution. His-
but, coming after Christ and possessing the gift of torically, the Revolution raises the French people
the Spirit, surpass him in the work of the into a “people of the new law”, the law of action
sanctification of the universe through suffering. that succeeds ages of sacrifice and prayer. Saint-
Martin described the Revolution as an ‘abridged
6. HISTORY image of the last judgement’ in recognition of
Do historical events play any role in effecting its epochal status of inaugurating the reign of
reintegration, or is history for Saint-Martin, as for the homme-esprit who rediscovers its function
Boehme and Martinés de Pasqually, simply the of administering the universe by the creative power
stage on which a spiritual drama is played out? of the Word. The Revolution, like all actions in
Saint-Martin’s interpretation of the overwhelming the physical world, is a sign of spiritual action, of
historical event of his generation, the French Revo- divine magism. By manifesting rediscovered human
lution, may serve as a testcase for this question. energy and thereby announcing reintegration, the
Though Saint-Martin observed the Revolution and Revolution is a great sign marking the liberation of
its social and political consequences with interest humanity. Liberation, here, includes an anti-cleri-
and even, in the beginning, enthusiasm, it troubled cal dimension: the Revolution destroyed a Catholic
him, as it troubled an entire European generation. clergy which had interposed itself between God
In the mid-1790s he worked out his response to it and the people. Saint-Martin’s interpretation of the
in Lettre a un ami, ou Considérations politiques, Revolution, which decodes it as a hieroglyph of

--- Page 454 ---
SAINT-MARTIN 1030
spiritual meaning, was guided by his conviction which the value of particular integers and the rela-
that nothing happens without permission from tionships among them teach the investigator about
Above. Saint-Martin both comprehends the Revo- the structure of the cosmos and the linkages among
lution within the providential order and declares its levels. Arithmological speculation feeds on bib-
it to be irreversible because it marks spiritual lical passages in which specific dimensions are
progress. But this positivity has its reverse. God given, above all, those concerning Solomon’s Tem-
regenerates France, but punishes it; the violence of ple and the Ark of the Covenant.
the Revolution expiates its forgetfulness of God in Arithmology was a recurrent interest of Saint-
the century past. Martin, in which he was guided by Martinés de
Saint-Martin’s reflections on the Revolution con- Pasqually and Boehme. It is prominent in Des
tributed to the elaboration within his theosophy of Erreurs et de la Verité, Le Tableau naturel, and
a philosophy of history in which humanity, en- L’Esprit des choses, in his correspondence with
gaged in a process of historical becoming, raises Kirchberger, and received in-depth treatment in
itself to a dynamic consciousness of eternal truths. the manuscript Les Nombres (published in two
The “Great Work” of reintegration, as an epic modern editions). Les Nombres opens with the
of the human will, culminates when regenerated proclamation: ‘Numbers are only the abridged
humanity, the homme-esprit, becomes once again a translation, or the concise language of the truths
flawless mirror of Divinity, when the reconquest of and laws of which the text and ideas are in God, in
humanity’s quasi-divine status in the realization of man, and in nature’. The balance of the work
its primordial state restores unity and universal draws out the implications of this view within the
harmony. The providential design for history is structure of Saint-Martin’s theosophy.
thus fulfilled, not by the establishment of new
Des erreurs et de la vérité, ou Les hommes rappelés ausocial and political institutions, but by spiritual
Principe universel de la science, Edinburgh (Lyons),
reintegration. Historical events do not in them-
1775 @ Tableau naturel des rapports qui existent entre
selves effect reintegration; rather, they are signs of Dieu, Vhomme, et univers, Edinburgh (Lyons), 1782
the activity of the reawakened will and primitive (in: Oeuvres Majeures, vol. 2) @ L Homme de deésir,
faculties, which are the true agents of reintegration. Lyons, 1790 (in: Oeuvres Majeures, vol. 3) @ Ecce
Saint-Martin values history, not for itself, but for Homo, 1792 (in Oeuvres Majeures, vol. 4) ¢ Le nou-
the divine signs it encodes. While his reflections on vel homme, Paris, 1792 (in Oeuvres Majeures, vol. 4)
history and politics inspired certain socialist vision- @ Lettre a un ami, ou Considérations politiques,
philosophiques et religieuses sur la Révolution
aries of the 1830s in their attempts to establish ter-
francaise, Paris, 1795 (in Oeuvres Majeures, vol. 7) #
restrial utopias, for Saint-Martin himself historical Eclair sur association humaine, Paris, 1797 (in Oeuv-
events are symbolic of, not instrumental to, the res Majeures, vol. 7) # Le Crocodile, ou la guerre du
reintegration of humanity. Though history points bien et du mal arrivée sous le regne de Louis X V:Poéme
to it, Saint-Martin’s new order is outside history épico-magique en 102 chants, Paris, 1799; reprint
altogether. While Saint-Martin’s theosophy, reflect- Paris: librarie du Cercle social, 1976 @ De l’esprit des
choses, ou Coup d’oeil philosophique sur la nature desing the conviction of French Enlightenment
étres et sur l'objet de leur existence, Paris, 1800 (in
thinkers that political events and social institutions
Oeuvres Majeures, vol. 5) # Le Ministére de ’homme-
are constituent elements of human development esprit, Paris, 1802; reprint Le Tremblay: Diffusion rosi-
even while repudiating 18th-century rationalism crucienne, 1992 @ Les Nombres (Robert Amadou,
and materialism, marks the beginning of the con- ed.), Paris: Cariscript, 1983 # Les Nombres (Nicole
vergence of voluntarism and _historical-minded- Jacques-Chaquin, ed.), Nice: Belisane, 1983 # Mon
ness, ultimately Saint-Martin regards reintegration portrait historique et philosophique, Robert Amadou
(ed.), Paris: Julliard, 1961 # Oeuvres Majeures, 5 vols.,as an interior reorientation of the will and looks to
in 7 tomes (Robert Amadou, ed.), Hildesheim, New
the end, not the culmination, of history.
York: Georg Olms Verlag, 1975-1990 # Correspon-
dence inédite de L.-C. de Saint-Martin et Kirchberger
7 OR DTH M-O1.0Gy (L. Schauer & A. Chuquet, eds.), Paris: Dentu 1862 ¢
Arithmology (or arithmosophy [> Number Sym- Mon Livre vert (Robert Amadou, ed.), Paris:
bolism]) treats numbers not as conventionally Cariscript, 1991 @ Saint-Martin’s translations of Jacob
agreed upon values, but as signs of the divinely Boehme: L’aurore naissante, Paris, 1800 @ Les Trois
Principes de l’Essence Divine, Paris, 1802 @ De la
established relationships uniting God, humanity
Triple vie de Homme, Paris, 1809 Quarante ques-
and the universe. In this view, numbers are the
tions sur l’dme, Paris, 1807 English translations:
expressions of the diverse properties of being; they Theosophic correspondence between Louis Claude de
express truth, but do not give us truths. The science Saint-Martin (The “Unknown Philosopher”) and
of arithmology is thus a metaphysics of numbers in Kirchberger, baron de Liebisdorf, Pasadena, CA:

--- Page 455 ---
1031 SAINT-YVES D’ALVEYDRE
Theosophical University Press, 1982 @ L’'Homme de ous life, followed by a written oeuvre that was
désir [no translator given], Lyon: grand rue Merciére, widely recognized. The early years were difficult for
1973 @ Man, his true nature and ministry, Kila, MT:
this son of a doctor (most likely an alienist) who
Kessinger Publishing Company, 1994.
treated him very harshly and finally sent him to
Lit.: Les Cahiers de Saint-Martin, Nice: Belisane, Mettray, a boarding school specializing in young
1978-1984 @ Présence de Louis-Claude de Saint- delinquents but headed by an admirable man,
Martin: Textes inédits suivies des actes du Colloque sur Frédéric Demetz (1796-1873), whom the young
Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin tenus a l'Université de rebel considered as a father-figure and an inspirer.
Tours, Tours: Société ligérienne de philosophie; Uni- Here Saint-Yves read widely and became possessed
versité de Tours, 1986 Paul Bénichou, Le Sacre de
by the idea of a mission to be accomplished: to
Pécrivain, 1750-1830, Paris: J. Corti, 2nd edition
become the “Pythagoras of Christianity”. After 1985, chapter 3 @ Ernst Benz, Les sources mystiques de
la philosophie romantique allemande, Paris: Vrin passing his baccalaureate in Paris and serving in the
1968, chapter 5 # Frank Paul Bowman, “Illuminism, National Marines simultaneously with medical
Utopia, and Mythology”, in: D.G. Charlton, The studies, he joined the French exiles around Victor
French Romantics, 2 vols., Cambridge: Cambridge Hugo (1802-1885) on the island of Jersey. Disci-
University Press, 1984, 1, 76-112 @ Nicole Chaquin, ples of Pierre Leroux (1797-1871) introduced him
“Le Citoyen Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin, Théo-
to the master, and more importantly to Virginie
sophe révolutionnaire”, Dix-Huitiéme Siecle (Numéro
Faure, a charming old lady who had known > spécial: Lumiéres et Révolution) 6 (1974), 209-224
Nicole Jacques-Chaquin, “Le Crocodile (1799) ou Le Fabre d’Olivet, and who perhaps owned the latter’s
Paris fantastique d’une Révolution figurée”, Les manuscripts that Saint-Yves was later accused of
Cahiers de Saint-Martin 9 (1994), 236-257 @ Pierre plagiarizing. After Jersey, Saint-Yves went to Eng-
Deghaye, “Jacob Boehme and His Followers”, in: land and made friends with Edward Robert Bul-
Antoine Faivre & Jacob Needleman (eds.), Modern wer-Lytton (1831-1891), the son of the author of
Esoteric Spirituality, New York: Crossroad 1995, 245-
the initiatic novel Zanoni [> Edward George Bul-
246 Antoine Faivre, “Vis Imaginativa”, in: Theoso-
wer-Lytton. There was a rumor that Saint- Yves had phy, Imagination, Tradition, Albany: State University
of New York Press, 2000, 99-136 @ Nicole Jacques- also met the elder Lytton, as well as > Eliphas Lévi.
Lefévre, Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin, le philosophe The turning-point in his life came with his marriage
inconnu (1743-1803): Un illuministe au siécle des in 1877 to Marie-Victoire, Countess Keller (1827-
Lumieres, Paris: Dervy, 2003 # Jacques Matter, Saint- 1895), daughter of a family of chamberlains to the
Martin, le philosophe inconnu, Paris: Didier, 1862
Tsar and close to Madame Hanska (1801-1882),
Arthur McCalla, “Illuminism and French Romantic
who married Balzac (1799-1850). The couple set-
Philosophies of History”, in: Antoine Faivre & Wouter
J. Hanegraaff (eds.), Western Esotericism and the Sci- tled in a magnificent town house in Paris, then in
ence of Religion, Louvain: Peeters 1998, 253-268 ¢ Versailles, where Saint- Yves, endowed with a papal
Papus [Gérard Encausse], Louis-Claude de Saint- title of Marquis d’Alveydre but spurned by high
Martin, Paris: Charcornac, 1902, repr. Paris: Demeter, society, concentrated on realizing his spiritual des-
1988 @ Mieczxyslawa Sekrecka, Louis-Claude de tiny, supported by the active admiration of his wife.
Saint-Martin le Philosophe Inconnu, Wroclaw, 1968
Saint-Yves conceived a vast historical system
Arthur Edward Waite, The Life of Louis Claude de
around the cycle of Ram, legislator of our human-
Saint-Martin (1901), reprinted as The Life of Louis
Claude de Saint-Martin, the Unknown Philosopher, ity (Abraham — Ab-Ram - owed his name to him),
and the substance ofhis transcendental doctrine, Blau- whose secret spiritual direction has always been
velt, NY: R. Steiner Publications, 1970. exercised through the intermediary of the “King of
the world” out of his subterranean city of “Agar-
ARTHUR MCCALLA tha”. The modern world might regain the harmony
lost in successive schisms by submitting to the “uni-
Saint-Yves d’Alveydre, Joseph versal trinitarian synarchy”. Saint-Yves presented
Alexandre, * 26.3.1842 Paris, his project from 1882 onwards, publishing a series
t 6.2.1909 Pau (Basses-Pyrénées) of “Missions”: Mission actuelle des Souverains
(Current mission of the sovereigns, 1882), Mission
The name of “synarchy” given to the synthesis of actuelle des ouvriers (Current mission of the work-
all human knowledge, as dreamed of by Saint- ers, 1882), Mission des Juifs (Mission of the Jews,
Yves, played an extraordinary role within the myth 1884), Mission de I’Inde (Mission of India, 1886,
of conspiracy that flourished around World War II, published posthumously), and Les Etats généraux
bearing no relationship to its author’s intentions. du suffrage universel (The states-general of univer-
Saint-Yves d’Alveydre’s reputation was solidly sal suffrage, 1888). His oeuvre was addressed to the
established in the Parisian world after an adventur- political world, the syndicates, the cultivated public,

--- Page 456 ---
SAINT-YVES D’ALVEYDRE 1032
but definitely not to the occultists, whose organiza- Before devoting himself to > mysticism and >
tions he carefully avoided; it proposed the institu- Christian theosophy, Saltzmann led a worldly life.
tion of a hierarchy of economic, political, and On leaving the university, he became tutor to Baron
religious powers in a great spiritual body, conceived von Stein, the future reformer of Prussian institu-
on the model of the Christian Trinity. Thanks to tions. Saltzmann’s correspondence with Madame
communications with his deceased wife, which he von Stein displays his first literary activities at
received from 1897 in his private chapel at Ver- Gottingen, particularly the publication of an Al-
sailles, he completed his revelation by conceiving of manach des Muses (Muses’ almanac) modeled on
a machine of universal correspondences (sounds, that of Delalain in Paris. His cultural and literary
colors, forms): L’Archéométre (1911), which also activities after his return to Strasbourg obtained for
gave the key to the primordial language of Watan. him first the secretariat, then the directorship of the
The “Friends of Saint-Yves” undertook the posthu- Deutsche Gesellschaft (German society) founded
mous publication of the work, but soon fell apart; by the poet Lenz, and of its organ, Der Biirger-
nonetheless, his influence was felt in fields as vari- freund (The burgher’s friend). Saltzmann was also
ous as architecture, > music, the plastic arts, and in responsible for the publication of another Stras-
the Western Indianism between the World Wars. bourg periodical, the Gelehrte Kunstnachrichten
(Learned art news), organ of the Société des gens de
Clefs de l’Orient, Paris: Didier, 1877 @ Mission actuelle Lettres (Society of literary people) founded by
des souverains, Paris: Dentu, 1882 # Mission actuelle Blessig and Jean de Turckheim.
de ouvriers, Paris: Dentu, 1882 La Théogonie des
With these varied literary activities and a vast
patriarches ..., Paris: La Librairie hermétique, 1909
Mission de I’Inde en Europe, Paris: Dorbon, 1910 knowledge of books, which had put him in touch
L’Archéometre - Clefde toutes les religions et de toutes with the famous Berlin publisher of the Enlight-
les sciences de l’Antiquité — Réforme synthétique de enment, Friedrich Nicolai, Saltzmann was well
tous les arts contemporains, Paris: Dorbon, 1911. prepared for the work of bookseller and journal-
ist. In 1782 he acquired the Librarie Académi-
Lit.: Philippe Encausse, Sciences occultes ou 25 années
que. When the French Revolution broke out, he
d’occultisme occidental: Papus, sa vie, son ceuvre,
owned the most important newspapers in Stras- Paris: Ocia, 1949, 317-371 @ Jean Saunier, Saint- Yves
d Alveydre ou une synarchie sans énigme, Paris: Dervy- bourg. This situation destined him to play a role
Livres, 1981 @ Joscelyn Godwin, Music and the in political events. A member of the moderate
Occult, Rochester, N.Y.: University of Rochester party, he was soon, along with them, the target,
Press, 1995, 181-196 @ Jean-Pierre Laurant, L’Eso- then the victim, of the Jacobins. Banishment was
térisme chrétien en France au XIX® siécle, Lausanne: his reward.
LAge d’Homme, 1992, vols. 4, 5 # Olivier Dard, La
These trials seemed to Saltzmann to be Provi-
synarchie ou le mythe du complot permanent, Paris: Le
grand livre du mois, 1998 @ Jean-Pierre Laurant, “St- dence’s invitation to turn away from worldly
Yves d’Alveydre fondateur du pacte synarchique”, Le affairs. His “conversion” had been prepared by fre-
Figaro (5.3) 1998. quenting pietist circles [> Pietism], and also by his
activities within the Templar Freemasonry [> Neo-
JEAN-PIERRE LAURANT Templar Traditions; > Freemasonry] of Stras-
bourg. During a stay in Lyon, from December 1777
Saltzmann, Frédéric-Rodolphe, * year to January 1778, he prepared with Jean de Turk-
unknown Sainte-Marie-aux-Mines, heim and + J.B. Willermoz the reformation of
t 7.10.1821 Strasbourg French Freemasonry, beginning with the recasting
of the symbolic degrees and that of the Scottish
Saltzmann’s father, Jean-Rodolphe, son of a Master. Henceforth, the French Templars took the
wealthy Strasbourg merchant, was pastor at name of -» Chevaliers Bienfaisants de la Cité
Sainte-Marie-aux-Mines from 1746 to 1759. His Sainte. This reform was ratified at the Convent of
mother, Marie-Elisabeth Sauer, was daughter of a Wilhelmsbad in 1782. Saltzmann (ab hedera) was
manufacturer in the Val d’Argent. In 1759, Saltz- a member of the Collége des Grands Profés (Col-
mann Sr. was appointed pastor at the Temple Neuf lege of great professed [masons]) created the previ-
in Strasbourg, and Frédéric-Rodolphe became a ous year by Willermoz at the Convent des Gaules.
pupil at the famous Protestant gymnasium, Jean Saltzmann, with Plessen, succeeded in rallying Fer-
Sturm. In 1765 he entered the Theology faculty of dinand of Brunswick and Charles of Hesse for this
the University of Strasbourg, but very soon new system. But the cause was far from won. In
changed to the Law faculty, while still following 1785, Saltzmann had to tour the towns of Ger-
courses at the Faculty of Letters. many to investigate the situation in the lodges and

--- Page 457 ---
1033 SANGRO DI SAN SEVERO
hold negotiations in view of their adherence to the Es wird alles neu werden, Strasbourg: Silbermann,
Chevaliers — a journey that was disappointing, 1802-1810 @ Bemerkungen iiber die letzten Zeiten und
whatever he said of it. die zweyte sichtbare Zukunft Jesu Christi zur Errich-
tung seines herrlichen Reiches auf Erden, von einem
The Terror marked a break in Saltzmann’s life,
Forscher der Wahrheit, Strasbourg: Silbermann, 1806
after which he devoted himself almost exclusively
@ Ein Wort der Vereinigung, oder Beantwortung der
to theosophic and mystical speculations, insepara- Frage: Ist die Tradition eine zuverlassige Erkennt-
bly linked. The Bible, and especially the writings of nisquelle der christlichen Religion in unseren Zeiten,
the Apostles, held first place here with the Fathers Strasbourg: Silbermann, 1808 @ Was ist Tod, Todten-
of the Church. But above all, Saltzmann formed a behaltniss, Errettung vom Tode und Auferstehung,
bond with the > mysticism of the Middle Ages. He Strasbourg: Silbermann, 1810 @ Blicke in das Geheim-
nis des Rathschlusses Gottes tiber die Menschheit von
recognized Johannes Tauler as a spiritual father, >
der Schépfung bis ans Ende der Welt, Strasbourg: Sil-
Jacob Boehme as another. Following Tauler, Saltz- bermann, 1810 @ Religion der Bibel in Abhandlungen
mann preached the necessity of a mystical union liber einige Stellen der heiligen Schrift, zur Erbauung
with God in the depths of the uncreated soul of the fur gebildete Leser, nach den Bediirfnissen unserer
divinity, in order to cast off the old man and bring Zeit, Strasbourg: Silbermann, 1811 @ Es ist die letzte
about the birth of the new man, who would then Stunde, Strasbourg: Silbermann, 1815 Geist und
Wahrheit oder Religion der Geweihten, Strasbourg:regain his primordial power from before the Fall.
Silbermann, 1816.
The end would return to the beginning. Like >
Saint-Martin, Saltzmann followed Boehme in his Lit.: E. Barth, Notes biographiques sur les hommes de
cosmogonic and anthroposophic theories. Averse la Révolution a Strasbourg et les environs, Mulhouse,
to the idea of eternal punishment, he also decreed 1877-1885 @ R. Brassel, La Franc-Maconnerie de
the final reintegration of all beings. Saltzmann and Strasbourg, Strasbourg: Archives Municipales, 1975
Oberlin gave a graphic description of the other L. Chatellier, “Un libraire et ses livres 4 Strasbourg a
la fin du XVIII* siécle”, Recherches Germaniques 6
world, relying on the theories of ~ Swedenborg,
(1976) P. Claus, “Un centre de diffusion des ‘Lu-
among others. Saltzmann debated these in copious miéres’ a Strasbourg: la Librairie Académique (1782-
correspondence with his theosophic brethren: > 1799)”, Revue d’Alsace 108 (1982) @ J. Keller, Le
Jung-Stilling, > Johann Friedrich von Meyer, > théosophe alsacien ER. Saltzmann et les milieux
Johann Caspar Lavater and his Zurich circle, Her- spirtuels de son Temps, Bern: Peter Lang, 1985 ¢@
bort de Berne, and others. G. Lasch, ER. Saltzmann, ein Strassburger Journalist,
Strassburger Post, 1913 @ J. Matter, “M. de Saint- Among Saltzmann and his friends, the prospect
Martin, Mme de Boecklin, les deux Salzmann et
of the future was resolutely optimistic, because our
Goethe”, Revue d’Alsace (1860) # A.L. Salomon,
era, even though destined to see the general Frédéric-Rodolphe Saltzmann, son role dans Vhistoire
destruction at the end of time (which they thought de la pensée religieuse a Strasbourg, Paris, 1932.
to be imminent), would give way to a new golden
age marked by the return of Christ and destined to JULES KELLER
last a thousand years. The German Romantics [>
Romanticism] would in turn take up this vision of Sangro di San Severo, Raimondo di
the golden age, but with a different orientation, for * 30.1.1710 Torremaggiore (Foggia,
they turned to a far-off, mythic past. Italy); -p'22-32771 Naples
Saltzmann never hoped for his theosophic teach-
ing to act on the broad mass of Christians, and One of the significant figures in the early history of
would have wished the esotericism of his thought Italian > Freemasonry, Prince Raimondo di Sangro
to have prevented it. He only wanted to address di San Severo was born into one of the most illustri-
the “men of aspiration”, that little band of interior ous families of the Naples aristocracy, with family
Christians, that long chain of the children of God, connections extending to European royalty dating
present and future, who are affiliated to the first back to the Middle Ages. A pupil of Jesuit schools in
Christians, whose spiritual heritage they have re- Rome and Naples, di Sangro emerged in the 1730s
ceived and whose superior enlightenment, known as an inventor in several different fields, from fire-
to them alone, they transmit to other initiates. works to weaponry, and from hydraulic machines to
The works of Saltzmann appeared anonymously. new fabrics and tapestries. Some of his inventions
Their author was identified thanks to his corre- were greeted with skepticism; others, particularly in
spondence with Jung-Stilling and J. von Meyer. the military field (in which di Sangro also excelled,
Several of the writings mentioned therein have dis- as a commander in the Neapolitan army), appar-
appeared, while others have remained in manu- ently worked well, and their creator was celebrated
script, including his autobiography. as a precocious, if somewhat bizarre, genius.

--- Page 458 ---
SANGRO DI SAN SEVERO 1034
Freemasonry, which had its earliest and largest To Catholics who claimed that, although per-
Italian lodges in Naples, became one of di Sangro’s haps no longer a Freemason, he was still a panthe-
most dominant interests in the late 1740s. Even ist, di Sangro answered by re-interpreting his
before his formal initiation (possibly no earlier theory of “quip” in a booklet published in 1753
than 1750), and his installation as Grand Master of and dedicated to the Pope; and by drafting and
Neapolitan Freemasonry shortly after, di Sangro circulating (but not publishing) an Antitoland in
wrote several works and letters to political figures 1754, in which he tried, with great care, to distin-
in which, capitalizing on his military successes, he guish his ideas from Toland’s pantheism. To
argued that the most successful European armies Freemasons, who accused him of having betrayed
(in empires such as Prussia and Britain) were those the order, di Sangro replied that his criticism
which counted mostly active Freemasons among was only directed against the rationalist wing of
their generals. Freemasonry; in fact, he continued to write about
This is an argument also advanced in di Sangro’s + alchemy and > hermeticism, at least throughout
most controversial work, the Lettera Apologetica, the late 1750s.
published in 1750. The Lettera is an apology, Critics created the legend of di Sangro as a dab-
against Catholic critics, in defense of Freemasonry bler in black + magic and occult sciences [>
and its usefulness to monarchs, armies, and the occult/occultism], still reproduced in countless
population in general. It is also an unashamed works of popular literature. In fact, there is no
apology for the di Sangro family and its role in evidence that he ever practiced ritual magic, and his
Neapolitan history. It is much more than that, how- approach to Freemasonry was, as he claimed,
ever, insofar as it includes (particularly in its very “philosophical”, although his philosophy was
lengthy footnotes) a theory of language, of the more in the tradition of > Giordano Bruno than of
magical power of words, and of mysterious sacred the Enlightenment philosophes. A frequent accusa-
languages. Central among these in the Lettera is the tion against di Sangro is that he was insincere and
“quipu”, i.e. the language expressed, according to ready to compromise his ideas when political
di Sangro, in the knotted cords used by the Incas in advantages for himself and his family were at stake.
Peru (and burned as potentially demonic by Jesuit di Sangro’s ideas were so peculiar, however, that he
missionaries). The “quipu”, di Sangro argued, could with some sincerity deny complete self-
reveals secrets of potentially universal value, a identification with any organization of his time,
truth beyond all sectarian truths in the shape of the from Freemasonry to the Roman Catholic Church.
“Pachacamac”, a benevolent original God who On the other hand, a grand idea of the di Sangro
was, it was claimed, surprisingly similar to the > family undoubtedly dominated the Prince’s life,
Hermes Trismegistus of the Hermetic tradition. and should be taken into account when interpret-
With the Lettera and other works, di Sangro ing di Sangro’s most visible legacy, i.e. the extraor-
made two different sets of powerful enemies. One dinary Temple of Piety that he built in his family’s
included the Roman Catholic Church, the Inquisi- Sansevero Chapel in Naples. A late Baroque mas-
tion (exposed in the Lettera in the style of an terpiece, the Temple does in fact include elements
Enlightened philosopher), and the Jesuits, who of Freemasonry and non-Christian religions. There
accused di Sangro of trading Christianity for a pan- is a risk, however, of reading too much into its con-
theism a la John Toland (1669-1722). The other voluted architecture and sculptures, and those who
was the rationalist wing of Freemasonry, which did look for hidden alchemical secrets are influenced as
not like di Sangro’s reliance on sacred languages much by legend as by the real-life figure of the
and exotic occult secrets. Prince di San Severo. They forget that the Temple
For a number of political reasons, di Sangro was also built in celebration of the di Sangro fam-
decided to make peace with the Church. In 1751, ily, and of the grandiose sense of self-importance of
when Rome proceeded to excommunicate Freema- an aristocrat who was not ashamed to dedicate his
sons, he accepted to deliver to the authorities a list most important literary works to none other than
of all Naples’ Freemasons, resigned as Grand Mas- himself.
ter on July 24, and wrote to the Pope on August 1,
seeking forgiveness and the lifting of his excommu- Pratica pin agevole e piu utile di Esercizij Militari per
nication. Although he was informed verbally that l’infanteria, Naples: G. Di Simone, 1747 @ Lettera
Apologetica dell’Esercitato Accademico della Cruscathe Pope regarded his excommunication as no
contenente la Difesa del Libro Intitolato Lettere d’una
longer in force, the Catholic Church nonetheless
Peruana per rispetto alla supposizione de’ Ouipi scritta
included the Lettera in its Index of forbidden alla Duchessa di S ...e dalla medesima fatta pubbli-
books in 1752. care, Naples: n.p., 1750 Supplica di Raimondo di

--- Page 459 ---
1035 SATANISM
Sangro, Principe di Sangro di San Severo, Umiliata alla accused of being Satanist organizations, although
Santita di Benedetto XIV, Pontefice Ottimo Massimo, they were rather anticlerical and libertine clubs,
in difesa per rischiaramento della sua Lettera Apolo-
not particularly interested in Devil worship.
getice sul proposito de’Quipu de’ Peruani, Naples:
Catholic authors later connected these episodes to Salzano e Castaldo, 1753.
the French Revolution, which they believed had
Lit.: L. Sansone Vagni, Raimondo di Sangro Principe di been masterminded by anti-Catholic Satanists.
San Severo, 2nd ed., Foggia: Bastogi, 1992 # Vincenzo Between 1800 and 1865, more than thirty influen-
Ferrone, I profeti dell’Illuminismo: Le metamorfosi tial works, exposing a widespread Satanist con-
della ragione nel tardo Settecento italiano, Roma & spiracy, were published in France and in other
Bari: Laterza, 1989.
countries. This religious literature became dis-
credited by its own excesses, however, and slowly
MASSIMO INTROVIGNE
disappeared.
In the 1880s, Jules Bois (1868-1943) and novel-
Satanism ist > Joris-Karl Huysmans (1848-1907) explored
the French occult underworld, and in 1891 Huys-
Theologically, Satanism has been defined as a mans published his best-selling novel on Satanism,
religious or philosophical system which professes La-bas, which included one of the most famous lit-
or manifests a hatred of Christianity. Historians erary descriptions of a Black Mass. The Satanists of
and religious studies scholars usually adopt a dif- the 1880s were not invented by Huysmans; they
ferent definition, and limit Satanism to the adora- already existed, although they had admittedly only
tion, in an organized and ritual form, of the figure a few members in two or three small cults operat-
known in the Bible as the Devil or Satan. Accord- ing in France and Belgium. Again, public opinion
ing to this definition, therefore, early modern > overreacted and, in the wake of the success of La-
witchcraft cannot be defined as Satanism: what- bas sensational revelations on a worldwide Satanic
ever it was, it was not an organized form of Devil conspiracy were offered to the French public by
worship. journalist Léo Taxil, whose real name was Marie-
Organized Satanism is a modern phenomenon. Joseph-Antoine-Gabriel Jogand-Pagés (18 54-1907).
Its first incarnation was in the circle operating, at He had also announced, with much fanfare, his
the Versailles court of Louis XIV (1638-1715), conversion from > Freemasonry and anti-clerical-
around Catherine La Voisin (?-1680) and the ism to Roman Catholicism in 1885. Taxil revealed
defrocked Catholic priest Father Guibourg (whose that a huge Satanist organization called “Pallad-
first name is never mentioned in contemporary ism” was behind political anti-Catholicism, Free-
accounts: 1603-1683). La Voisin invented the masonry, > Spiritualism, and occultism [+ occult/
“black Mass”, i.e. an “inverted” Roman Catholic occultism], all placed under the authority of a
Mass in which, by appropriately changing the for- “Satanic Pope”, revealed to be the prominent
mulae, Satan is worshiped and Jesus Christ is American freemason Albert Pike (1809-1891).
cursed. Black Masses at which Guibourg and other Eventually, Taxil’s sensational stories came under
renegade Catholic priests officiated were sold by increasing scrutiny by both Freemasons (including
La Voisin as means of obtaining specific favors the British Masonic encyclopaedist -> Arthur
(such as money or love) from Satan to a number Edward Waite, 1857-1942) and Catholics (partic-
of nobles, including the King’s lover, Madame ularly the Jesuit press in France and Germany). In
Francoise de Montespan (1641-1707). In 1695 the 1897, Taxil confessed at a conference in Paris that
royal guards discovered the ring; but because the there was neither a Palladism, nor a worldwide
subsequent investigation involved too many well- Satanic conspiracy at all; his own conversion to
known figures it was not carried to its full conclu- Catholicism had also been a hoax which he had
sion, although La Voisin was burned at the stake in conceived in order to convince the world just how
1680 and Guibourg died in jail in 1683. The Ver- gullible the anti-Masonic Catholics of his time
sailles incident became famous all over Europe actually were.
thanks to the then recently acquired prominence of Although a body of literature inspired by the
the press, and small rings imitating what they had Taxil fraud continued to be published well into the
read of La Voisin and Guibourg were subsequently 2oth century (including L’Elue du Dragon, a 1929
discovered in France, Italy, and Russia. In the 18th book claiming that U.S. President James Abram
century, the Hell Fire Clubs and the Society of St. Garfield, 1831-1881, had replaced Albert Pike as
Francis, created by British politician and dilettante chief of the worldwide Satanic conspiracy before
Sir Francis Dashwood (1708-1781), were in turn his assassination in 1881), anti-Satanism was

--- Page 460 ---
SATANISM 1036
largely discredited after the infamous Taxil hoax. seduction and went on to formulate the alternative
When in the 1930s Russian-born occultist Maria explanation for hysteria which eventually made
de Naglowska (1883-1936) established an openly him famous. Eighty years after Freud’s early career,
Satanist cult in Paris, the press was more amused the theory of seduction surfaced again. A Canadian
than scandalized, and some newspapers character- Catholic therapist, Lawrence Pazder, was told by
ized her kind of Satanism as an interesting “reli- his patient Michelle Smith that she had been
gious experiment”. The international press was abused as a child by a Satanic cult of international
less kind when British magus > Aleister Crowley proportions twenty years before, had witnessed
(1875-1947) shocked his contemporaries by styling horrible scenes of human sacrifice and cannibal-
himself ‘the Beast 666’ and ‘the wickedest man in ism, had seen the Devil in person, but had forgot-
the world’. Crowley made use of Satanic imagery ten all these experiences until beginning therapy
and is still regarded by many as the founding father with Pazder. Unlike Freud, Pazder concluded that
of contemporary Satanism. The British occultist, Smith’s memories corresponded to true and actual
however, was a “magical atheist” who did not be- historical events, publishing in 1980 a book that
lieve in the actual existence of Satan; and although eventually became a bestseller, Michelle Remem-
he has been influential on later Satanic movements, bers. Although the book was written from a reli-
he should not be regarded as a Satanist in the nar- gious point of view, it was welcomed more by
rower, technical sense of the term. On the other certain secular mental health professionals than
hand, it is true that Crowley enthusiasts, including by the churches. Michelle’s story was interpreted
movie director Kenneth Anger, were instrumental within the context of an ongoing discussion on
in founding the Church of Satan in San Francisco in Multiple Personality Disorder (MPD), a disorder
1966, its notorious spokesman being the former whereby the same patient “dissociates” into differ-
carnival performer Anton Szandor LaVey (pseudo- ent “alters” who speak with different voices, may
nym of Howard Stanton Levey, 1930-1997). have very different personalities and may not
LaVey’s Church of Satan and its main splinter remember what the other “alters” think or do.
group, Michael Aquino’s Temple of Set, remain the Therapist Cornelia Wilbur was instrumental in
largest Satanic organizations in the world. They are promoting the theory that MPD was almost invari-
not large, however: in fact, their combined active ably the result of severe childhood trauma, often in
membership (not to be confused with their mail- the form of sexual abuse. As a result of increasing
ing lists) does not exceed one thousand people and media coverage of MPD, thousands of patients in
is probably even smaller. The main reason for the United States began claiming that they were
Aquino’s schism from LaVey was that the former “survivors” who had been abused by Satanic cults
believed in the literal existence of Satan (or Seth), in their childhood. Therapists and anti-Satanist
while LaVey, although believing in the power of > activists alike ultimately repudiated Freud, claim-
magic and ritual, regarded Satan as a metaphor for ing that the survivors’ stories were literally true.
each person’s higher self, which emerges when lib- They also called for quick action by public author-
eration is achieved from the strictures of Judaeo- ities to uncover the perpetrators, who were, they
Christian morality. claimed, members of a vaste, “multigenerational”
LaVey’s notoriety certainly played a role in the and deadly dangerous Satanic conspiracy. Anti-
early stages of the anti-Satanist campaign of the Satanists also speculated that MPD does not
1970s and 1980s. In his early studies of hysteria, always arise as a spontaneous protection mecha-
Sigmund Freud used hypnosis, and for a while nism against traumatic memories, but may instead
became convinced that what he called the “theory be “planted” by Satanists, who presumably have
of seduction” could explain the genesis of hysteria access to sophisticated psycho-technologies ena-
in female patients. All the patients he hypnotized, bling them to brainwash children to dissociation,
in fact, remembered being sexually abused in child- making their memories so garbled that future
hood, a memory they were not conscious of while identification of the perpetrators becomes virtually
not under hypnosis. While Freud was initially per- impossible. Influenced by the survivor stories,
suaded that these memories corresponded to real, some therapists reasoned that the Satanic cults
historical instances of abuse, he became perplexed were probably still operating, and that many of the
when, continuing the hypnotic therapy, almost all child sexual abuse incidents (unfortunately com-
the patients “remembered” abuse by Satanists mon in the United States and elsewhere) may
(mostly their parents) in bizarre ceremonies and include an undetected Satanic element. The first
apparitions of the Devil himself. Freud dismissed and the most famous court case arising from these
these stories as fantasies, abandoned the theory of claims involved the McMartin Preschool in the

--- Page 461 ---
1037 SATORNILUS
affluent Los Angeles suburb of Manhattan Beach. handful of murders. In these cases, it is difficult to
The McMartin case began in 1983, when the prin- determine whether drug, gang-related violence or
cipals and a number of teachers of the respected Satan worship are mostly responsible for the
preschool were accused of operating an under- crimes. What is clear is that teenage Satanism is
ground Satanic cult, which ritually abused and not connected with any international conspiracy,
tortured children. Mental health professionals and is a different phenomenon from both “ritual”
involved in the case were later accused of having child abuse by adult pedophiles and the religious
“planted” the stories in the children’s minds (some Satanism represented by leaders such as the late
of them only two or three years old) based on their Anton LaVey or Michael Aquino. As far as the lat-
own theories about Satanic conspiracies. The ter is concerned, the excesses of the anti-Satanist
McMartin trial was the most expensive in United campaigns based on survivor accounts have again
States legal history, and ended in 1990 with no con- made the media more reluctant to attack religious
victions. It had an enormous media impact, how- Satanism. Indeed Satanic rituals are still being
ever, and undoubtedly had something to do with practiced, comparatively undisturbed by the au-
the hundreds of subsequent similar accusations of thorities, by the Temple of Set, what remains of the
Satanic ritual abuses in both day-care centers and Church of Satan after LaVey’s death in 1997, anda
in family settings. Although complete statistical handful of smaller organizations (the largest of
data is lacking, it is possible that as many as two which may have been the Italian Children of Satan
thousand cases of Satanic ritual abuse of children in the 1990s).
were investigated in the decade 1983-1992. Al- Summing up, from the Court of Louis XIV right
though, in a handful of cases, pedophiles did use through contemporary California, the pendulum
Satanic symbols and paraphernalia in order to has periodically swung between Satanism and anti-
scare their victims, there was no evidence con- Satanism. Small Satanic cults have existed from
firming the existence of an international Satanic time to time and have produced (since Satanism is,
network of abusers. Gradually, sociologists and by definition, intolerable) gross overreactions in
other academics emerged as the most vocal critics the form of Satanism scares. The success of the
of the theory of a Satanic conspiracy and did much anti-Satanist campaigns has been limited by their
to ridicule the stories of survivors. own exaggerations. The fact that each wave of
By 1991, even some psychiatric MPD specialists anti-Satanism has been discredited, has allowed
were harboring doubts on the factual truth of the new Satanic cults to operate for a while, creating in
survivors’ Satanic stories. In 1994 two official turn a new overreaction, and so on.
reports, one by the U.S. National Center for the
Prevention of Child Abuse and Neglect, and one by Maria de Naglowska, La lumiere du sexe: Rituel d’ini-
tiation satanique selon la doctrine du troisieme terme
sociologist Jean S. La Fontaine on behalf of the
de la trinité, Paris: Editions de la Fléche, 1932 @ Anton
U.K. government, concluded that stories of Satanic Szandor LaVey, The Satanic Bible, New York: Avon
ritual abuse were largely figments of the survivors’ Books, 1969 @ Michael Aquino, The Church ofSatan,
imaginations, that no secret Satanic underground Los Angeles: The Author, 1989 # Michelle Smith &
existed, and that the imaginary evil of international Lawrence Pazder, Michelle Remembers, New York:
Satanic pedophile cults should not be confused Congdon & Lattés, 1980.
with the very real evil of pedophilia. After these
Lit.: Massimo Introvigne, Enquéte sur le satanisme:
reports, the number of court cases involving alle-
Satanistes et anti-satanistes du X VII* siécle a nos jours,
gations of Satanic ritual abuse decreased from sev- Paris: Dervy, 1997 # James T. Richardson, Joel Best &
eral hundreds to less than ten per year on a David G. Bromley (eds.), The Satanism Scare, New
worldwide scale, and most convictions based on York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1991 @ Jeffrey S. Victor,
survivors’ accounts were reversed on appeal. Satanic Panic: The Creation of a Contemporary
It is also important not to confuse the debate on Legend, Chicago/La Salle (Illinois): Open Court, 1993:
@ Karl R.H. Frick, Satan und die Satanisten, 3 vols.,
the Satanic ritual abuse of children with discus-
Graz: Akademische Verlagsanstalt, 1982-1986 [with
sions of adolescent Satanism. There is little doubt great caution].
that there are gangs of teenagers performing some
sort of home-made Satanic ritual mix (copied from MASSIMO INTROVIGNE
comics, books or movies) and drug parties. These
teenagers are often guilty of minor crimes such as Satornilus, ca. 120
vandalism or animal sacrifice. In less than a dozen
cases over the last two decades, more serious Satornilus (Gr. Satorneilos, in Lat. sources Satur-
crimes appear to have been committed, including a ninus) was a Christian Gnostic [ Gnosticism]

--- Page 462 ---
SATORNILUS 1038
active in Antioch. Our knowledge of Satornilus life apparently symbolizes the class of good people,
derives almost exclusively from the information the one who crawled on the ground and was unable
provided by Irenaeus of Lyons in his Adversus to stand up refers to the class of evil people. The
Haereses 1, 24, 1-2 (ca.180). According to Irenaeus Saviour has come to destroy both the demons and
and other anti-Gnostic writers Satornilus was a all evil men and to save the good ones.
pupil of > Menander, but this view is based more Satornilus and his followers abstained from mar-
on the assumption of a Gnostic “genealogy” than riage and the begetting of children as instigations of
on a correspondence between their essential doc- Satan, and also from carnal food. In doing so, Ire-
trines. He taught that there existed one Unknown naeus says, ‘they deceived many by this seeming
Father who had created ‘angels, archangels, pow- abstinence’. If Irenaeus’ report is trustworthy — and
ers and dominions’. Seven specific angels had made there are no reasons to doubt it — Satornilus
the world and everything in it, and man also was a adhered to or, less probable, developed himself an
creation of the angels. When an image of light from early version of the classic Gnostic myth as repre-
the highest power appeared in the world and the sented, in a more developed form, by the Apoc-
angels were unable to catch it, since it immediately ryphon of John and related texts. Satornilus may
withdrew to heaven, they said to each other: ‘Let us have been influenced by Jewish speculations on the
make man after the image and the likeness’ (Gen. creation of the world and man, but his rejection of
1:26). So they did, but because of their weakness the Jewish God and the clear distinction he made
they could not raise their mould, which crawled between two classes of human beings make him
like a worm. Then the Power on high had pity with one of the first Christian Gnostics of whom we
this creature because it was its image, and sent a know more than a name.
spark of life which raised the first man and made
him alive. At death the spark of life returns to its A. Rousseau & L. Doutreleau (eds.), Irénée de Lyon:
Contre les Hérésies, Livre I (SC 264), Paris: Les Edi-
origin and the body is decomposed into its con-
tions du Cerf, 1979 (with French translation); English
stituents. This biblically inspired creation myth is
trans., after the German trans. by W. Foerster, in: idem
typically Gnostic; it is found in several Gnostic doc- (ed.), Gnosis: A Selection of Gnostic Texts, English
uments, inter alia in the Apocryphon ofJohn. trans. edited by R.McL. Wilson, vol. 1, Oxford:
Satornilus’ doctrine of salvation, as reported by Clarendon Press, 1972, 40-41.
Irenaeus, does not completely fit, or at least
qualifies, the creation story mentioned above. A ROELOF VAN DEN BROEK
distinction is now made between the Unknown
Father, the angels who created the world, and the Scabelloni, Antonio > Scaligero,
demons. The Jewish God is one of the angels and Massimo
probably their head; the devil, who apparently is
the chief of the demons, was originally an angel but
Scaligero, Massimo (Antoniohostile to the other angels and the Jewish God. The
prophecies were partly given by the angels, partly Scabelloni), * 17.9.1906 Veroli
by the devil, which implies that Satornilus valued (Province of Frosinone, Italy),
certain Old Testament prophecies more than oth- t 26.1.1980 Rome
ers. This shows that Satornilus took part in the
2nd-century discussions about the meaning of the One of the most distinguished members of the
Jewish scriptures within the Christian context. But Italian Anthroposophical Society [- Anthroposo-
notwithstanding this differentiation between the phy], Scaligero was born as Antonio Scabelloni
heavenly powers, Satornilus taught at the same in Veroli (not far from Rome) on September 17,
time that they all tried to remove the Father from 1906. As a teenager, he became interested in yoga
his supreme position and that for that reason and in different forms of Western esotericism, and
Christ had been sent. It was his mission to break in 1921, while on vacation in Sardinia, had a mys-
the power of the Jewish God and save those who tical experience of the universe as light and energy.
would believe in him, i.e. those who possess the He subsequently became a disciple of Giovanni
spark of Life. It now turns out that the angels had Colazza (1877-1953) at that time the member of
made two kinds of human beings, good and evil the Italian Anthroposophical Society closest to
ones. Only the good ones had received the spark of Anthroposophy’s founder > Rudolf Steiner (1861-
life, the evil ones are assisted by the demons. The 1925). Scaligero later reported that Colazza was
primeval man who was raised up by the spark of one of the twelve chosen disciples with whom

--- Page 463 ---
1039 SCHELLING
Steiner attempted in 1913-1914 to performa ritual Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von,
which, had it succeeded, would allegedly have pre- TTL S eCONDErEs | 201011854
vented World War I.
Ragaz
In those years, Colazza also worked closely with
> Arturo Reghini (1878-1946), — Julius Evola The son of a pastor, and himself a student (with
(1898-1974), the poet Arturo Onofri (1885-1928) Holderlin and Hegel) in the seminary of Tiibingen,
and others within the framework of Rome’s Schelling very soon began to publish works in the
“Gruppo di Ur”. Although several members of this tradition of Fichte. As early as 1797 he became pro-
group were neo-pagans, Colazza maintained a firm fessor at the University of Jena, and subsequently,
Anthroposophical orientation (and, in 1924, per- in 1803, at that of Wirzburg. In 1801 he parted
suaded Onofri to preface the first Italian edition of ways with Fichte, in presenting his own system of
Steiner’s Occult Science). Contrary to persistent philosophy. From 1806 to 1827, he left teaching to
rumours, Scaligero was not a member of the group occupy the lucrative and undemanding position of
at this time; he was introduced to Evola only in director of the Academy of Fine Arts of Bavaria. In
1930. A favourable review of one of Evola’s works 1827 he once more became a professor, at the Uni-
on race later caused Colazza’s young disciple (who versity of Munich, and in 1841 he was called to the
had now adopted the pen name of Massimo University of Berlin. His inaugural lecture has been
Scaligero) to be occasionally counted, after World described by Karl Jaspers as the last great public
War II, among those intellectuals who supported event of the German university. However, the stu-
Fascist anti-semitism. Actually Scaligero was not dent audiences remained faithful to the memory of
particularly interested in Fascist politics at that Hegel and soon deserted Schelling, who took his
time, although he later wrote, in the 1960s, several definitive retirement in 1846.
books criticizing Marxism and counted among his A professor showered with honors and a
students several young right-wing intellectuals. philosopher universally recognized as one of the
Scaligero went on to befriend Evola, but (just most typical representatives of German idealism
as his master Colazza) nonetheless remained a (together with his teacher Fichte and his comrade
devoted Anthroposophist throughout his entire Hegel), at first glance Schelling may not seem to
life. His books, published from the 1950s to the belong to the history of esotericism. In fact, he did
1970s, confirm his basic Anthroposophical orien- not have much opportunity to actually encounter
tation. They are, however, interesting for their representatives of esotericism in his life —- except for
many references to several movements and figures a friendship, soon broken off, with > Franz von
of Italian esotericism. In this milieu, Scaligero Baader. However, a reading of his work and his cor-
knew almost everybody, and was widely re- respondence nevertheless reveals a precocious con-
spected. He wrote about practically every topic dis- tact with Germanic ~ Christian theosophy, first
cussed within the esoteric “underground”, and through the works of > Oetinger (which were in
frequently added new insights of his own. His sis- his family’s library), then, probably starting in
ter, Adelina Scabelloni (1908-2000), married 1802, by a direct reading of > Boehme. This
Christian esotericist Paolo M. Virio (pseudonym of influence is evident in the most original part of the
Paolo Marchetti, 1910-1969), and in turn wrote young professor’s work, his Naturphilosophie, de-
several esoteric books under the pen name of veloped notably in Die Weltseele (The World Soul,
Luciana Virio. 1797), Darstellung meines Systems der Philosophie
(Presentation of my System of Philosophy, 1801),
Avvento dell’uomo interiore: Lineamenti di una tec- and Aphorismen tiber die Naturphilosophie (Apho-
nica dell’esperienza soprasensibile, Florence: Sansoni,
isms about Naturphilosophie, 1806). We find in it
1959 @ Trattato del pensiero vivente: Una Via oltre le
the typical Boehmenist pattern of a revelation of filosofie occidentali, oltre lo yoga, oltre lo Zen, Milan:
Feriani, 1961 @ La luce: Introduzione all’ Immagi- the Absolute, beginning paradoxically with its
nazione creatrice, Rome: Tilopa, 1963 Graal: Saggio velatio in matter subject to gravity, and then freed
sul Mistero del Sacro Amore, Rome: Perseo, 1969 from matter through the redemptive action of light.
Dallo Yoga alla Rosacroce, Rome: Perseo, 1972 @ However, the perspective in Schelling’s case is not
Reincarnazione e karma, Rome: Mediterranee, 1976. so much that of Christianity as that of an astral
paganism in the lineage of > Giordano Bruno
Lit.: F. Belfiori & G. Burrini (eds.), Massimo Scaligero:
(Bruno, 1802). II coraggio dell’impossibile, Teramo: Tilopa, 1982.
Schelling’s viewpoint changes in the Philoso-
MASSIMO INTROVIGNE phische Untersuchungen iiber das Wesen der

--- Page 464 ---
SCHELLING 1040
menschlichen Freiheit (Philosophical investigations from this perspective, appears not so much as the
about the essence of human freedom) contempora- expression of an immature science but, rather, as
neous with the meeting with Baader (1809), and in the ultimate version of an alchemical myth in
Schelling’s major unfinished work Die Weltalter which the Christ-Light acts, prior to his historical
(The ages of the world) of which there are several mission, as the redeemer of nature (or of the uncon-
versions (1811, 1813, and 1815). Here, the initially scious, in the philosophy of mythology). This
neutral Absolute takes on the personal characteris- mythical background, combined with a rejection of
tics of the Trinitarian God: the Father, who is pure all initiatory esotericism, gives Schelling’s work
freedom, while passing into existence, becomes (not unlike that of > Carl Gustav Jung one century
subject to an internal contradiction, a “wheel of later) its remarkable character of “a mystery in
anxiety” from which he cannot escape except by broad daylight”.
engendering his Son, his redeeming sun (Sohn/
Sonne/Siihne), who clarifies the paternal chaos and Samtliche Werke, 12 vols., Stuttgart: Cotta, 1856-
1861 @ Die Weltalter (Urfassungen), Minchen: C.H.
replaces it with the consonance of the Spirit.
Beck, 1946.
In 1827, returning to teaching after an interval of
almost twenty years, Schelling maintained this Lit.: Ernst Benz, Les sources mystiques de la philoso-
theogonic scenario, but placed it within the context phie romantique allemande, Paris: Vrin, 1965 @ idem,
of a “philosophy of mythology”. The latter ap- Schellings theologische Geistesahnen, Wiesbaden: Franz
pears as the struggle of the ancient God Kronos Steiner Verlag, 1955 Friedemann Horn, Schelling
(who stands for the universal power that usurped und Swedenborg: Ein Beitrag zur Problemgeschichte
des deutschen Idealismus und zur Geschichte Sweden-
the place of the divine act of existing [Sei],
borgs in Deutschland, Zurich: Swedenborg Verlag,
whereas he should have remained its simple foun- 1954 Robert Schneider, Schellings und Hegels Geis-
dation [Grund]) with the young god Dionysos, tesahnen, Diss. Bonn, 1938 @ J.F. Marquet, Liberté et
God’s very act of existing. Once having gained the existence: Etude sur la formation de la philosophie de
victory, he abdicates his acquired dominion and, Schelling, Paris: Gallimard, 1973 # idem, “Schelling et
submitting to the Father in the Incarnation, makes la philosophie de la nature”, in: Antoine Faivre & Rolf
possible the advent of the Spirit within the Church. Christian Zimmermann (eds.), Epochen der Natur-
mystik: Hermetische Tradition im wissenschaftlichen
The latter, following the Joachimite pattern, has
Fortschritt, Berlin: Erich Schmitt, 1979.
developed historically as the Church of Peter (=
Catholicism, based upon observance), followed by JEAN-FRANCOIS MARQUET
the Church of Paul (= Protestantism, based upon
subjective faith), finally to culminate in the Church
of John, founded on the positive philosophy of Schlag, Oscar (or Oskar) Rudolf,
which Schelling considers himself the initiator. * 22.3.1907 Osterhofen (Bavaria),
To the influence of Boehme seems to have been t Zurich 29.11.1990
added, by 1810, that of > Swedenborg. It was
probably from the latter that Schelling borrowed Already as a teenager, Schlag was held to possess
his identification of the Son with the divine act of mediumnistic faculties. In 1927, Albert Schrenck-
existing (perhaps by way of Fichte’s Anweisung Notzing, a dominant figure in continental parapsy-
zum seligen Leben |1806]). We again find Sweden- chology at the time, recruited him as a test subject
borg’s influence in the background of the beautiful in the laboratory he had set up in Landshut (the
dialogue Clara (1810?) in which Schelling, still in association lasted no more than a few months).
shock about the death of his first wife, tries to Two years later, Schlag settled in Luzern, where he
unravel the mystery of the Geisterwelt. This work, worked as a philatelist. In 1930 he moved on to
like the Weltalter and the lectures on Mythology Zurich where he was to remain for the rest of his
and Revelation, only appeared after Schelling’s life, except for several stays in other countries,
death (although the lectures were published during notably in North and South America. In Zurich, no
his lifetime in several “pirated” editions). later than 1929, he began to hold séances in which
Among his contemporaries, Schelling never man- he was the medium. Then, in 1932, he began to
aged to free himself from the image of a pantheist study under the guidance of the celebrated
and Naturphilosoph, suggested by his first writ- graphologist Max Pulver, to the point of eventually
ings. Only in the 2oth century, authors interested in becoming himself a highly respected graphologist.
~ Christian theosophy such as Vladimir Soloviev In the same period he also studied psychology at
or Franz Rosenzweig began to do justice to the reli- the Institut fiir Angewandte Psychologie (Institute
gious dimension of his work. Naturphilosophie, for Applied Psychology), where in 1938 he began

--- Page 465 ---
IO41 SCHLAG
to give lectures on psychic phenomena and on the mann. But the séances continued to be held almost
theoretical foundations of Yoga. He continued this every week throughout the 1930s, and more spo-
activity for many years. From 1949 to 1962 he bus- radically afterwards (some took place even as late
ied himself intensively with psychoanalysis. He as the 1960s). The typescript of all these sessions
trained for a career as a psychoanalyst under Oskar consists of many thousands of pages, starting on
Pfister, and afterwards enjoyed great success with September 20, 1930.
his own practice as a psychological consultant in Atma’s provenience and ontological status re-
Zurich. He authored poems, a few articles, and main obscure. In his statements about himself, he
essays, some of which have remained unpublished occasionally suggests he might be an “egregor”
(they are preserved in the archives of his library). (i.e., a product of the participants’ collective psy-
Unlike many mediums, Schlag was a very culti- che), but more often he presents himself as an entity
vated man, particularly in history of Western and of divine nature. His Instructions constitute a kind
Eastern religions, and more specifically of esoteric of never-ending story or dream, with beginning nor
currents. From the early 1930s on, he began to cre- end. As his inspiration goes, he dwells and com-
ate a superb library of his own, which expanded ments on a great variety of symbols, themes and
over the years to ca. 26.000 books, and must be myths for a while, then suddenly leave them for
considered one of the three richest European others, only to take them up again later. He exten-
libraries in the domain of Western esotericism. sively deals with > alchemy, kabbalah [> Jewish
After his death, it was made over to the Zentral- Influences], the ~ Tarot, Egyptian and Greek
bibliothek in Zurich and is now open to the public. mythology, Buddhism, Hinduism, and last but not
It is still located in his house, where its holdings are least a great variety of Yoga theories and practices.
preserved as well. In collaboration with the Zen- He does so in a way that very much reflects the lit-
tralbibliothek, the Oscar R. Schlag Foundation erature of the period. Written in a German not
(created in 1990), also in Zurich, is responsible for deprived of some moments of poetic beauty, these
the maintenance of both these holdings and the texts are always characterized by a “noble”, orac-
house. Schlag’s importance in 2zoth century West- ular style.
ern esotericism is not only due to his activity as a Interestingly, during the first séances (1929/
collector of books, for he was himself a practicing 1930), another entity made its appearance as well.
esotericist as well. His connections to numerous It went by the name of Cyprian, referring to a per-
initiatory societies, in particular to the ~ Ordo son who had allegedly died many years before. This
Templi Orientis (OTO, of which he was, however, spiritualist aspect was no longer present after
not a member), are well documented. His posthu- Cyprian had left the stage. Taken as a whole, the
mous renown as an esotericist results largely, how- “Instructions” are anthropocentric in character
ever, from the publication (as of 1995) of the (i.e., almost devoid of cosmogonical or cosmo-
Lehren, or Unterweisungen (Instructions), trans- sophical elements), dealing mostly with the devel-
mitted from 1929 on during weekly séances in opment of human potentialities for the benefit of
Zurich by an entity that presented itself under the the individual person, by means of initiatory tech-
name of Atma, and was “channeled” by Schlag. niques. In this respect, the séances with Atma
The first ones were written down by a participant belong to the forbears of the so-called channeling
during these séances; but as soon as it became tech- literature that was to flourish within the > New
nically possible they were recorded on disks and Age movement as of the 1960s. In 1946, Atma
typed out afterwards. Among the early partici- stated that the Instructions he had been giving for
pants, most of whom were reputable scholars and sO many years now represented a body of material
scientists, were Fritz Allemann (a member of the from which benefit could be drawn also by people
Eranos group), the psychologist and Art historian outside the group. In response to this, the Instruc-
Rudolf Bernoulli (who lectured at Eranos in 1934) tions are now in the process of being published.
and his wife Katharina, the psychiatrist and para-
psychologist Eugen Bleuler (~ Carl Gustav Jung’s “In Memoriam Dr. Freiherr von Schrenk-Notzing”,
superior at the clinic Burghdlzli), and Max Pulver. Okkultistische Rundschau 4 (1929) @ “Anmerkungen
eines Graphologen zur Handschrift von Ernst Jiinger”,Carl Gustav Jung himself participated in one of
Graphologia Il, Bern: Huber, 1949, 12-24 @ Friihe
these séances, resulting in a long recorded conver-
Gedichte, Zurich: Origo, 1955 # “Die Symbolik des
sation between him and Atma (see Die Lehren des Tarot”, Alpina 123:4 (1997), 102-107 @ Von alten
Atma., 1, 14. November 1930). This original group und neuen Mysterien: Die Lehren des Atma, vol. I,
of participants dwindled after a few months, and (Antoine Faivre & Erhart Kahle, eds., with the collab-
was eventually reduced to the Bernoullis and Alle- oration of Annelis Bergmaier), Stafa: Rothenhdausler,

--- Page 466 ---
1042
SCHLAG
1995 @ Next volumes (II-IX) under the title Die Lehren ued his scientific activity in Dresden, where he
des Atma, same eds., Wiirzburg: Ergon, published played a central role in a circle of Romantics [>
from 1996 to 2003 (the series is to be continued; each Romanticism] that included Adam Miller (1779-
volume has between 350 and 550 pages). 1829), Heinrich von Kleist (1777-1811), and the
painter Caspar David Friedrich (1774-1840). It was
Lit.. Hans Thomas Hakl, review of Von Alten und
in this context, during the winter of 1807-1808, neuen Mysterien: Die Lehren des Atma, vol. 1, ARIES
20 (1996), 94-97 @ idem, Der verborgene Geist von that Schubert gave his famous lectures entitled
Eranos: Unbekannte Begegnungen von Wissenschaft Ansichten von der Nachtseite der Naturwissen-
und Esoterik, Bretten: Scientia Nova, 2001, 147, 159, schaft (Views of the night-side of natural science).
199, 216 Erhart Kahle (and Antoine Faivre), “Ein- In his speculations on somnambulism, > animal
fihrung”, in: Die Lehren des Atma, vol. I, V-XXI ¢
magnetism, seership, and dreams, Schubert tried to
Peter K6nig, Das OTO-Phanomen: too Jahre Magi-
restore the link that he believed had once existed sche Geheimbiinde und ihre Protagonisten von
1895-1994, Munich: ARW, 1994, 206-218 @ idem, between man and the universe. He gave attention
Materialien zum OTO, ARW: Munich 1994, 273-306 to the > correspondences uniting the One with the
(many testimonia) # Peter Mulacz, “Oscar R. Schlag”, All, and discovered in Sehnsucht (nostalgia) a
Journal for the Society of Psychical Research 60, nr. 89 thread of continuity that could be traced through
(1995), 263-266 # Website of the O.R. Schlag Foun- the whole of creation.
dation: www.Stiftung-schlag.ch
Published in 1808, these lectures reached a vast
ANTOINE FAIVRE audience and had considerable success. After his
nomination in 1809 as director of the Nuremberg
lyceum, Schubert discovered the world of the mys-
Schneider, Joseph Anton > B6-Yin-Ra tics and theosophers by reading the works of
Meister Eckhart (1260-1327), ~ Jacob Boehme,
Schneiderfranken, Joseph Anton > and > EC. Oetinger. These years were decisive for
Bo-Yin-Ra the evolution of his philosophical and religious
thought. His meeting with > Franz von Baader
definitively turned him toward the theosophy of >
Schubert, Gotthilf Heinrich von, Saint-Martin. In 1811, Schubert translated the
* 26.4.1780 Hohenstein-Ernstthal, “Unknown Philosopher”’s De Il’esprit des choses
T 30.6.1860 Munich (On the spirit/mind of things). Saint-Martin’s >
illuminism marks most of Schubert’s subsequent
The son of a Saxon pastor, Schubert attended writings, especially Die Symbolik des Traumes
lyceum at Weimar, where he followed the courses (Symbolism of the dream, 1814). In this highly suc-
ofJ.G. Herder (1744-1803). The work of this great cessful work, which was reprinted eight times,
thinker would play a decisive role in the develop- Schubert expounds a veritable metaphysics of the
ment of Schubert’s philosophical thought. He stud- dream and unconscious states. Thanks to the prin-
ied theology in Leipzig before turning to medicine ciple of analogy he believed to have discovered that
and the natural sciences. A deep faith inherited dream, poetry, revelation, and myth have in com-
from his Pietist education [- Pietism] combined mon a universal, inner language that has its source
with a veritable passion for science would mark the in the night-side of the soul. The myth of the Fall
rest of his life. explains the disappearance of the original har-
An authentic theosopher [> Christian theoso- mony, while animal magnetism makes it possible to
phy], Schubert never ceased to refer to the funda- re-establish the unity between conscious life and
mental importance of the “two books”: the Bible unconscious activity.
and Nature. Throughout his life, he sought to make In 1819 Schubert was appointed as professor at
these two “readings” coincide in his publications. the University of Erlangen, where he taught miner-
Through his openness to the ideas of his age, and alogy, zoology, and botany. His career culminated
also through his vocation as a teacher and writer, in 1827 in his appointment at the University of
he helped promote the philosophical theses of > Munich, where he found Schelling, Baader, and
Schelling, with whom he studied in Jena from 1801 Gorres (1776-1848) at his side. King Ludwig I of
to 1803, and the original intuitions of the physicist Bavaria entrusted the education of his sons to him,
> J.W. Ritter. and bestowed the “von” on his name. Schubert
After following A.G. Werner’s (1749-1817) gave courses in anthropology and _psychology,
courses in mineralogy and “geognosis” at the while expounding his philosophical system in a
Academy of Mines in Freiberg, Saxony, he contin- work of over 1000 pages, Geschichte der Seele

--- Page 467 ---
1043 SCHUON
(History of the soul, 1830). In this book, which he Schuberts philosophische Anfange, unter besonderer
considered his major work, Schubert set himself Beriicksichtigung von Schellings Einfluss, Erlangen,
the task of discussing human nature and its con- 1930 @ Patrick Valette, “G.H. Schubert et la ‘Natur-
philosophie’”, in: Schubert, La symbolique du réve,nection with the material universe as well as the
Paris: Albin Michel, 1982, 9-54 @ idem, “Gotthilf Hein-
spiritual world. His esoteric understanding of life
rich von Schubert”, in: Encyclopédie philosophique
allowed him to connect the human soul with the universelle (Les oeuvres philosophiques, vol. 1), Paris,
world soul, ‘this spiritual link that maintains the 1992, 2109-2110.
cohesion of the sensible world’. He assigned to psy-
chology the task of describing the progress of the PATRICK VALETTE
soul, in nature and man, on its way toward God.
Schubert’s works were extremely successful Schuon, Frithjof (also known as Shaykh
among the Romantics, and inspired many writers. ‘Isa Nur al-Din Ahmad al-Shadhili
Heinrich von Kleist, E.T.A. Hoffmann (1776- al-Darqawi al- ‘Alawi al-Maryami),
1822), > Justinus Kerner, and later EF Hebbel were
* 18.6.1907 Basle (Switzerland),
profoundly influenced by them. Quite original in
t 5.5.1998 Bloomington, Indiana (USA)
his thought, nourished by esotericism, and marked
by speculative > mysticism, Schubert never tired of
Swiss esotericist and Sufi master [~ Neo-Sufism]
investigating the vibrations of nature and the mes-
whose personal life was complex and whose sub-
sages of the unconscious. His work fits well within
stantial corpus of metaphysical writings ranks
the grand tradition of Western theosophy that goes
among the most clear, profound, and gifted ones
from > Paracelsus to > C.G. Jung. A major repre-
produced by any similar author in the 2oth century.
sentative of Naturphilosophie, Schubert appears —
Schuon was born of German Roman Catholic
with > Mesmer, C.G. Carus (1789-1869) and oth-
parents. His father was a violinist and poet, de-
ers — as a precursor of psychoanalysis.
scribed by Schuon as highly gifted but a dreamer.
Ahndungen einer allgemeinen Geschichte des Lebens, His mother was apparently the opposite. Schuon’s
Leipzig, 1806 (vol. x), 1807 (vol. 2), 1821 (vol. 3) affinities were clearly with his father, who in-
Ansichten von der Nachtseite der Naturwissenschaft, fluenced him greatly. He describes him as strongly
Dresden, 1808 @ Die Symboltk des Traumes, Bamberg, inclined toward the esoteric and the mystical; he
1814 @ Altes und Neues aus dem Gebiete der inneren
maintained a small, darkened room in the family
Seelenkunde, Leipzig, 1817-1844 # Handbuch der Na-
house, probably for meditation, that contained turgeschichte, Nuremberg, 1827-1831 # Geschichte
der Seele, Tubingen-Stuttgart, 1830 @ Geschichte der nothing but a table with copies cf the Hindu Vedas
Natur, Erlangen, 1835-1837 Die Krankheiten und and the Ou’ran. It was in this Germanic childhood
Storungen der menschlichen Seele, Stuttgart, 1845 environment of esotericism, mythology, and poetry
Der Erwerb aus einem vergangenen und die Erwar- that Schuon lived his formative years, attending
tungen von einem zukiinftigen Leben: Eine Selbst- school with his life-long friend Titus Burckhardt,
biographie, Erlangen, 1854-1856 @ Gotthilf Heinrich
until his father’s death in 1920. Thereafter he, with
Schubert in seinen Briefen: Ein Lebensbild (Nathanael
his brother and his mother, moved to Mulhouse, Bonwetsch, ed.), Stuttgart, 1918.
France, just across the border from Basle. Schuon
Lit.: Albert Béguin, L’Ame romantique et le réve, Paris, was thrust abruptly from German into French cul-
1939 @ Ernst Busch, “Die Stellung Gotthilf Heinrich ture; he was enrolled at a French school and became
Schuberts in der deutschen Naturmystik und in der
a French citizen, while simultaneously attempting
Romantik”, Deutsche Vierteljabrsschrift 20 (1942),
to adjust to his father’s death. After a three-year 305-339 @ Hans Dahmen, “E.T.A. Hoffmann und G.H.
Schubert”, Literaturwissenschaftliches Jahrbuch der period of depression and melancholy, Schuon left
Gorres Gesellschaft 1 (1926), 62-111 Antoine Faivre, school and found employment as a textile designer.
“La philosophie de la nature dans le romantisme alle- It was also during this time that he briefly joined
mand”, in: Histoire de la philosophie, vol. 3, Paris, the Roman Catholic Church; but while his brother
1974, 14-45 @ Peter Krebs, Die Anthropologie des went on to become a monk, Schuon soon left the
Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert, Cologne, 1940 # Wil-
Church again, considering its perspective too nar-
helm Lechner, Gotthilf Heinrich von Schuberts Einfluss
row. In 1924 he discovered the works of > René auf Kleist, Justinus Kerner und E.T.A. Hoffmann, Min-
ster-Leipzig, r911 # Wolfgang Liepe, “Der Schliissel Guénon, which had a significant impact upon his
zum Weltbild Hebbels: G.H. Schubert”, in: idem, life, confirming his youthful perceptions and
Beitrige zur Literatur- und Geitesgeschichte (1963), inquiries into the inner life and esotericism.
139-157 @ Franz Rudolf Merkel, Der Naturphilosoph In 1928 Schuon joined the French Army. He
Gotthilf Heinrich Schubert und die deutsche Romantik, spent 18 months at Besancon, which he later
Munich, 1913 @ Gustav Osthus, Gotthilf Heinrich

--- Page 468 ---
SCHUON 1044
remembered as a period of boredom as well as and sexual symbolism played key roles; they are
stress. He thereafter relocated to Paris, where he described in his autobiography under the heading
again worked as a textile designer. He remained in “Sacred Nudity”. All charges were eventually
Paris for two years, immersing himself in the arts dropped, but the Bloomington Herald-Times had
and other forms of cultural expression, and began run nearly a dozen stories on the affair, and a French
to study Arabic. In 1932 he left Paris for Algeria: Guénonian group antagonistic toward Schuon
his first visit to a “traditional” society. Here met established Internet websites using these stories to
Sheikh Ahmad al-‘Alawi to whom he would come further accusations against him as being a cult
to refer as his spiritual master. Following this, leader. The affair was reportedly demoralizing for
Schuon assumed the Arabic name ‘Isa Nur al-Din. Schuon, and was a sad episode at the end of his other-
After his return to Europe he divided his time wise brilliant career as the foremost expositor of
between Paris, Basle, and Lausanne. From 1932 to the sophia perennis in the late 20th century. Schuon
1939, Schuon made other trips to Algeria and died in 1998 without producing another major book.
Morocco, and two separate trips to Cairo in 1938
Schuon was a prolific author whose published corpus
and 1939 to see René Guénon. After the last trip he
contains scores of books and articles, the complete list
sailed with two of his disciples to Bombay; but the of which appears in Religion ofthe Heart (p. 299) cited
eruption of World War II forced him to return to hereafter. What follows is a list of Schuon’s principal
France. Schuon again joined the French Army, but works in their first English translation, with the year of
within months was captured by the Germans, who original French publication in brackets where applica-
sought to make him join the German Army. He ble. The Transcendent Unity of Religions, London:
escaped and fled to Switzerland, where he would Faber & Faber, 1953 [Paris: Gallimard, 1948] Spiri-
tual Perspectives and Human Facts, London: Faber &
remain until 1980, when he relocated to Bloom-
Faber, 1953 [Paris: Les Cahiers du Sud, 1953] # Gno-
ington, Indiana, in the United States. sis: Divine Wisdom, London: John Murray, 1959
During the forty-year period from 1940 to 1980, [Paris: La Colombe, 1957] # Castes and Races, Lon-
Schuon wrote many of his seminal works on meta- don: Perennial Books, 1982 [Lyons: Paul Derain,
physics. He gradually shaped his Sufi tariqa, which 1957] Stations of Wisdom, London: John Murray,
he named Maryamiyah, of which he was the sheikh 1961 [Paris: Buchet/Chastel, 1958] # Understanding
or spiritual master, and into which he initiated sev- Islam, London: Allen & Unwin, 1963 [Paris: Galli-
mard, 1961] @ Light on the Ancient Worlds, London:
eral hundred men and women. Around 1946 he
Perennial Books, 1965 [Paris: Editions Traditionnelles,
parted ways with Guénon over a dispute regarding 1965] # Logic and Transcendence, New York: Harper
the efficacy of the Christian sacraments, and a num- & Row, 1975 [Paris: Editions Traditionnelles, 1970]
ber of disciples left the Schuon tariga to join Islam and the Perennial Philosophy, London: World of
Guénon’s group. In 1949 Schuon married one of Islam Publishing Co., 1976 @ Esoterism as Principle
his disciples, a German Swiss woman named and as Way, London: Perennial Books, 1978 [Paris:
Catherine Feer. Following the deaths of Ananda K. Dervy-Livres, 1978] Sufism, Veil and Quintessence,
Bloomington: World Wisdom Books, 1981 [Paris:
Coomaraswamy in 1947 and René Guénon in 1951,
Dervy-Livres, 1980] @ From the Divine to the Human,
Schuon gradually assumed the role of the premier Bloomington: World Wisdom Books, 1981 [Paris: Le
expositor of the philosophia perennis [> Tradition] Courrier du Livre, 1981] @ In the Face of the Absolute,
and leader of the Traditionalist school which the Bloomington: World Wisdom Books, 1989 [Paris: Le
two had started. Also during this forty-year period Courrier du Livre, 1982] @ Survey of Metaphysics
Schuon and his wife traveled extensively, including and Esoterism, Bloomington: World Wisdom Books,
1986 @ Having a Center, Bloomington: World Wis-several trips to the United States, where they visited
dom Books, 1990 [Paris: Maisonneuve Larose, 1988]
and were ceremonially initiated into the spiritual
¢ Roots of the Human Condition, Bloomington: World
practices of the Crow and Sioux Indians. Wisdom Books, 1991 [Paris: La Table Ronde, 1990].
In 1980 Schuon and his wife left Lausanne and
moved to Bloomington, where a community of dis- Lit.; Seyyed Hossein Nasr (ed.), The Essential Writings
ciples took shape at Inverness Woods. Schuon of Frithjof Schuon, Rockport, MA: Element, 1986
S.H. Nasr & William Stoddart (eds.), Religion of the
assumed the role of resident spiritual master; and
Heart, Washington D.C.: Foundation for Traditional
a publishing house, World Wisdom Books, was Studies, 1991 @ T. Béguelin (ed.), Les perles du pélerin,
established to publish and promulgate his writings. Paris: Seuil, 1990 @ Memorial volume Sophia: Journal
In 1991 Schuon was indicted by a Monroe County ofTraditional Studies 4:2 (1998) ¢ Harry Oldmeadow,
grand jury on several counts of child molestation “Frithjof Schuon, the Perennial Philosophy, and the
and sexual molestation. This stemmed from a prac- Meaning of Tradition”, Unpubl. Ph.D. diss. University
tice peculiar to his tariqga, which Schuon called of Sydney, 1982.
“primordial gatherings”, in which group nudity WILLIAM QUINN

--- Page 469 ---
1045 SCHWALLER
Schuré, Edouard, * 21.1.1841 up producing in Schurés mind a very simplistic
Strasbourg (Bas-Rhin), + 7.4.1928 Paris vision of global spiritual progress, leading from
Ram to Krishna, Orpheus, Pythagoras, > Moses,
Schuré came from the Lutheran Protestant bour- and Jesus Christ. This genealogy was offered to the
geoisie of Strasbourg, his mother being the daugh- general public in Les Grands initiés (The great ini-
ter of a university professor and the granddaughter tiates, 1889). The immense success of this work has
of a pastor. His education, in French and German, persisted through innumerable editions, continuing
was thorough but austere and conventional. Hav- up to the present day. Another work that strongly
ing passed through the faculty of Law, he traveled contributed to the development of Schuré’s ideas
from one university to another, as customary in his was The Perfect Way (1887) by > Anna Kingsford,
days; thus he spent some time in Heidelberg, Bonn, whose French edition (1891) he prefaced. Schuré’s
Berlin, and Munich. He was a great admirer of > “progressivism” was based on his belief in a hidden
Goethe and Nietzsche, with whom he exchanged motor of history: the permanence of the esoteric
letters (a chapter of Précurseurs et révoltés [Precur- tradition, ageless and common to all peoples. Bud-
sors and rebels], 1904, is devoted to him); and as dha and Mohammed were missing from the fresco
one of the first persons in France — along with > of the Grands initiés, which was further modified
Péeladan — to recognize the genius of Wagner, he in L’Evolution divine: Du Sphinx au Christ (Divine
became a habitué of Bayreuth. His Le Drame musi- evolution: From Sphinx to Christ, 1912). These
cal: Richard Wagner, son oeuvre, son idée (The modifications were inspired by Schuré’s meeting
music drama: Richard Wagner, his work, his idea, with > Rudolf Steiner in 1905: Schuré henceforth
1875) was reprinted several times. A taste for the insisted that the chain of “great initiates” culmina-
intellectual and social life of Paris also marked his tion in a cosmic Christ, conceived (after the fashion
personality. He frequented the fashionable spir- of The Perfect Way, and also in line with a tradition
itualist salons [> Spiritualism], especially the one common in rgth-century theological thought) as
of the very wealthy Lady Caithness (1832-1895), inheritor of the Greek Eleusinian Mysteries. Mysti-
a “Christian” theosophist and dissident member cal union through gnosis marked the higher spiri-
of the > Theosophical Society of ~ Madame tual state of man, according to Schuré, who
Blavatsky. The whole occultist [> occult / reproached the Church for having confiscated
occultism] world passed through this salon, Christ. Yet before his death he returned to the
together with liberal Protestants and spiritualist Lutheran faith.
feminists like Emilie de Morsier (1843-1896),
whose principles Schuré supported. He chose to Le Drame musical, Paris: Sandoz et Fischbacher, 1875
@ Les Grands initiés, esquisse de ’histoire secréte des
write in French, despite pressures from the German
religions: Rama, Krishna, Hermés, Moise, Pythagore,
side, then opted for French citizenship after the Platon, Jésus, Paris: Perrin, 1889 # La Vie mystique,
annexation of 1871. But it was in Italy that he Paris: Perrin, 1894 @ Rudolf Steiner, le mystére chré-
found his road to Damascus, in another literary tien et les mystéres antiques, Paris: Perrin, 1908 @
and aristocratic salon: that of Margarita Albana- Femmes inspiratrices et poétes annonciateurs, Paris,
Mignaty in Florence. Margarita, of Greek origin, 1909 @ L’Evolution divine, du Sphinx au Christ, Paris:
Perrin, 1912 @ La Druidesse, précédé d’une étude sur
inspired a hopeless passion in him and would
le réveil de l’ame celtique, Paris: Perrin, 1914 # L’Ame
remain his inspiration until his death, regarding celtique et le génie de la France a travers les ages, Paris:
both the feminist question and his vision of the Perrin, £921.
origins of mankind and the fundamental unity of
religions. He paid a biographical homage to her Lit.: Georges Jeanclaude, Edouard Schuré, Paris: Fisch-
in Femmes inspiratrices et poetes annonciateurs bacher, 1968 @ Alain Mercier, Edouard Schuré et le
renouveau idéaliste en Europe, Paris: Champion, 1980.
(Inspiring women and prophetic poets, 1908),
where one finds her in the company of Cosima
JEAN-PIERRE LAURANT
Liszt, Mathilde Wesendonck, and Malwide de
Meysenberg. Among the “poets” referred to in this
title was the esotericist > Saint-Yves d’Alveydre, Schwaller, René Adolphe (called de
whose mediocre poetry Schuré esteemed and who Lubicz; pseudonym Aor), * 31.12.1887
also inspired Schuré’s vision of a global history, Asniéres (France), ¢ 5.12.1961 Grasse
conceived of as starting with the “cycle of Ram”, (France)
the mythical founding hero from India. Saint-Yves
had used > Fabre d’Olivet, another one of Schuré’s This occultist writer, Egyptologist, and founder
principal sources; but these two influences ended of spiritual brotherhoods was of Alsatian origin,

--- Page 470 ---
1046
SCHWALLER
his pharmacist-chemist father having set up prac- on the sacred symbolic language; the latter was
tice in Strasbourg. René aspired to be a painter and supposed to furnish the key to the relationship
was a student in Henri Matisse’s atelier in Paris. between the “temple of stone” and the “temple of
Under the pseudonym of “Aor” he was an active man”, with the Pharaoh as the model of the initiate
member of the > Theosophical Society, and it and perfect man. The Schwallers’ enterprise
was at a lecture in the Adyar Hall of the Paris belongs to an old tradition of attempts to find the
Theosophical Society, in 1915, that the decisive origins of knowledge. After William Warburton
encounter took place between him and > Oscar de (The Divine Legation of Moses, 1738) and the
Lubicz Milosz. In 1917 the Baltic poet was fasci- Abbé Terrasson (Sethos, 1767), the occultists [>
nated by Schwaller’s publication of a booklet on > occult / occultism] of the rgth century had taken up
Number Symbolism, which expounded a vitalist the idea — already present in Plato’s Phaedrus — of
conception of their extension, beginning with the looking to ancient Egypt for the key to all the sci-
“irreducible one”, which supposedly provided the ences, and the Schwallers were trying in their own
key to the birth of the universe. Milosz was so way to adapt it to the scientific language of their
struck by it that his destiny remained linked with time. Their teachings have remained widely known
Schwaller’s until 1926, and even went so far as to in Parisian esoteric circles up to the end of the 2oth
adopt him: Schwaller was thereby authorized to century, and are often associated with those of >
join to his surname the noble name of “de Lubicz” Fulcanelli.
and use the Lubicz coat of arms.
There followed the foundation of a chivalric Etude sur les nombres, Paris: Librairie de |’Art indé-
pendant, 1917 @ La doctrine: trois conférences faites a
order called the “Veilleurs” (Watchers), which had
Suhalia, Noél 1926, St. Moritz: Officina Montalia,
a hierarchical structure and a secret inner circle. As 1927 @ Le Temple de l'homme: Apet du Sud a Louq-
founding members, the journalist Fernand Divoire sor, Paris: Editions Caractéres, 1957; Eng. trans. by
(1883-1951) and the writers René Bruyez (1886- D. & R. Lawlor, The Temple of Man, Rochester, Vt.:
1969), Carlos Larronde (1888-1940), and Gaston Inner Traditions International, 1998 # Le Roi de la
Revel (1880-1939, a leading figure in French théocratie pharaonique, Paris: Flammarion, 1961;
Theosophy) joined with some of the great names of Eng. trans. by A. & G. Van den Broeck, Sacred Science,
New York: Inner Traditions, 1982 # Du symbole et
Parisian literary and artistic circles, from Vincent
de la symbolique, Paris: Dervy, 1978; Eng. trans. by
d’Indy (1851-1931) to Henri de Régnier (1864- R. & D. Lawlor, Symbol and the Symbolic, Brookline,
1936). The group was inspired by the ideas of Mass.: Autumn Press, 1978 @ Verbe Nature, Paris:
Charles Fourier and the Saint-Simonians as revived Axis Mundi, 1988, with bibl. of René & Isha Schwaller
in > Saint-Yves d’Alveydre’s dreams of “synar- de Lubicz; Eng. trans. by D. Lawlor, Nature Word,
chic” unity; it published a successful periodical, W. Stockbridge, Mass.: Lindisfarne Press, 1982.
L’Affranchi (The Emancipated). However, its exis-
Lit.: Isha Schwaller de Lubicz, Aor: sa vie-son ceuvre,
tence was marked by journalistic attacks, of such
Paris: La Colombe, 1963 @ idem, L’Ouverture du
virulence that Schwaller eventually left Paris, in chemin, Paris: Aryana @ Pierre Mariel, Dictionnaire
1922, for the Engadine region of Switzerland. Here des sciences occultes en Occident, Paris: Culture, art,
a closed community called “Suhalia” functioned as loisir, 1971, 392-396 André Van den Broeck, Al-
an “initiatic monastery” until 1927. Kemi: Hermetic, Occult, Political, and Private Aspects
Schwaller broke with Milosz in 1926 due to the of R.A. Schwaller de Lubicz, Gt. Barrington, Mass.:
incompatibility of their respective illuminations, Inner Traditions/Lindisfarne Press, 1987 # Alexandra
Charbonnier, Milosz, l’étoile au front, Paris: Dervy,
especially concerning Milosz’s Christian interpre-
1993, 301-345 and appendix 5 @ Erik Sablé, La vie et
tation of > alchemy (see his Ars Magna, 1920). loeuvre de René Schwaller de Lubicz, Paris: Dervy,
Thereupon Schwaller cruised the Mediterranean 2003.
by yacht, thanks to the generosity of a disciple,
Jeanne (Isha) Lamy. In 1927 she became his wife, JEAN-PIERRE LAURANT
and in turn received a revelation, concerning the
secret meaning of the Egyptian hieroglyphs. Scientology
The Schwaller de Lubicz couple now founded a
“Groupe de Louqsor” (Luxor Group) with the sup- Scientology is a religious philosophy and a set
port of the Egyptologist Alexandre Varille (1909- of ritual practices partly based on Dianetics, a “do-
1951). Their study of the proportions of the it-yourself-therapy” developed by the American
temples of Luxor and Karnak and of the Pyramids, adventurer, philosopher and science fiction writer
combined with a new decipherment of the best- L. Ron Hubbard in a number of articles and,
known stelae, gave rise to a series of publications exhaustively, in the book Dianetics: The Modern

--- Page 471 ---
1047 SCIENTOLOGY
Science of Mental Health published in 1950. The the head of > Aleister Crowley’s > Ordo Templi
first Church of Scientology was founded in Wash- Orientis (O.T.O.) in Pasadena. However, triviali-
ington, DC in 1955. ties apart, no specific influence from Crowley can
Lafayette Ron Hubbard was born in Tilden, be traced in Hubbard’s later teachings in terms of
Nebraska on the 13th of March, rgrzr, as the son Scientology.
of a naval officer and a teacher, Harry Ross and By the end of the 1940s, editor Campbell got
Ledora May Hubbard. According to the extensive interested in Hubbard’s new therapeutic system,
hagiographical tradition of Scientology, from his Dianetics; and prior to the big release of Dianetics:
very early years he was brave and outstanding for The Modern Science of Mental Health on the oth of
his age, and eagerly interested in different cultures, May, 1950, Campbell wrote an enthusiastic fore-
people and customs, including various Indian tra- word to an article, ‘The Evolution of a Science’,
ditions; as a twelve-year-old he was introduced to published in the May volume of Astounding. The
the teachings of Sigmund Freud which, it is empha- decision to release Dianetics to a broader public of
sized, left him with many unanswered questions. lay readers seems to have been connected to the fact
Due to his father’s naval carreer, he was given the that Hubbard and his co-worker at that time —
opportunity to travel through the East, where he medical doctor Joseph A. Winther, who had moved
became familiar, so we are told, with the cultural to Bay Head, New Jersey to take part in Hubbard’s
and religious traditions of China, Japan, Guam, the work (having become familiar with it through
Philipines and other areas of the Orient. Although Campbell) - had not succeeded in breaking
keenly interested in everyone and everything he through to the American Medical Association or
met on his way, he concluded that no Eastern tra- the American Psychiatric Association. These early
dition of wisdom had found the answer to Man’s rejections seem to have played a crucial role in Sci-
basic problems of suffering, misery and despair. entology’s later polemics, which have continued
This was a great disappointment. According to Sci- until the present, against the medical and psychi-
entology sources, in 1929 he returned to formal atric establishment worldwide, and have con-
education in Manassas, Virginia and Washington tributed to Scientology’s self-understanding as a
DC and was enrolled at George Washington Uni- religion that promotes the truth that mainstream
versity in mathematics and engineering. science and society at large refuse to recognize.
From this time on, Hubbard devoted himself to According to Dianetics, Man is suffering from
a series of quasi-scientific studies and experiments powerful mental and psychosomatic traumas
in order to “solve Man’s problem”, while provid- because of the function and structure of the mind.
ing for himself and his family as a science fiction The human mind, according te Hubbard, is subdi-
novelist. The science fiction milieu, including the vided into three minds, the analytical mind, the
circles around the magazine Astounding Science reactive mind and the somatic mind. While the lat-
Fiction and its editior John W. Campbell, Jr., who ter serves as the body’s tool in acting out the deci-
became a key figure in promoting Hubbard’s sions and impulses from the two other minds on a
ideas, consisted of all kinds of intellectuals and sci- physical level, the analytical mind is described as a
entifically-trained individuals such as astronomers, perfect computation system that will always make
chemists, doctors and engineers. The articles writ- the best decisions by means of analyzing the avail-
ten and read by these people in Astounding not able data in the memory bank. However, in every
only reflected an interest in science fiction or re- incident in a person’s life that involves just a mini-
lated subjects such as extraterrestrial life, weapon mum of physical or mental pain, the analytical
development, space research and developments in mind shuts down and the reactive mind takes over.
technology. The magazine also published many And this is where the trouble begins. In the reac-
articles on alternative medical practices, psychol- tive memory banks of this mind, “engrams” are
ogy and occultism [> occult/occultism]; in many stored. Engrams are Hubbard’s conceptualization
ways the milieus surrounding the magazine were of memory units that involve pain. These engrams
similar to the environment, ideas and practices that are, in part, reactivated every time a person meets a
would later be referred to as the > Human Poten- situation that is just remotely similar to the incident
tial Movement and > New Age. Dianetics and, that originally caused the engram to be stored in
later, Scientology were therefore both developed as the bank. This function, Hubbard claims, is the
part of a living Western occult tradition where cause of all kind of irrational (“aberrated”) action
ideas were exchanged within a freethinking and and psychosomatic illness. In Dianetics Hubbard
creative subculture. In the mid-forties, Hubbard fully developed these ideas, and presented a prac-
was also very briefly in contact with Jack Parsons, tice designed to eliminate the harmful influence of

--- Page 472 ---
SCIENTOLOGY 1048
the engrams and the reactive mind: the Dianetics ically, mentally and spiritually. Each incarnation
therapy called “auditing”. has left the thetan with certain types of karmic
Soon after, Hubbard took his ideas and his ther- experience, which are still present on his or her
apeutic practice beyond the materialistic limita- “timetrack”. Through the ritual practices (“audit-
tions of early Dianetics, and from 1951 he began to ing”) and courses of Scientology, a person can
transform his therapy into a fully developed soteri- reach insight about these matters and ritually con-
ological religious system, by including in his system front his or her mythological past, thereby improv-
metaphysical ideas and “axioms” about the indi- ing his or her happiness, relationships, physical
vidual and his or her spiritual character and poten- condition and individual spiritual truth.
tial as well as about the cosmos at large. In 1954 Scientology is a practical and non-dogmatic reli-
Hubbard announced that what was initially a ther- gion in that the ideas developed by Hubbard from
apy, Dianetics, had now become transformed into 1950 to his death in 1986 are not seen as truths that
a religious system in its own right. The new religion must be unconditionally accepted by each individ-
was named Scientology (from Latin scio, to know ual scientologist. The truth is “what is true for
and from Greek, logos, word or thought; i.e. know- you”. On a theoretical level, this rhetoric implies
ing about knowing or the science of knowledge). the idea that the scientological practice is thought
From the very beginning, Hubbard was inspired to work for everyone no matter how the person’s
and influenced by science, religion and various conceptualizations of the world might be. On a
occult traditions and other conceptual systems. practical level, however, obviously individuals
Like many of the religious activities later found in engaged in the soteriological ritual practice of Sci-
the New Age Movement, Hubbard, in developing entology find the resources for their own individual
Scientology, was blending secular and religious stories in the reservoir made up of the extended
inspirations: on the one hand his perspective Hubbard material. Therefore, in practice, being a
reflects a critique of established science, while on scientologist does not imply seeking high and low
the other he considered his inventions scientific for theological elements fit for one’ own construc-
and he had scientific ambitions for his creations — tion of meaning but, rather, consists in integrating
without ever really exhibiting a scientifically valid the Hubbardian truths in one’s own life. It is a very
understanding of the premises of science. At the individual matter how far this integration is taken,
same time, although already at an early stage he but three things seem always to be present in scien-
criticized older religious traditions, e.g. Buddhism, tologists’ conceptualizations, e.g., the idea that a
for not being capable of solving the problems of person is a spiritual being, the idea of the timetrack,
Mankind, his system nevertheless reflects Buddhist, and the appreciation of Hubbard’s outstanding
Hinduist as well as Gnostic ideas [> Gnosticism]. qualities as a human being. Still, it is very individ-
Hubbard presented Scientology as true science as ual how reflective scientologists are. Many do, in
well as true religion, the latter in the sense of “wis- fact, seem to apply the principles of Hubbard in
dom”, as also done by present-day scientologists. their practice without speculating on their truth
The basic idea of Scientology is that man is a value. Practice is the central issue; gnosis is individ-
composite being of body, mind and spirit. The most ual - although certain incidents on the timetrack,
important unit is the spirit, i.e. the true individual, according to Scientology, have turned out to be
called a “thetan”. The basic problem is that in a common to all people.
very early stage of their development, thetans were Scientology offer its practitioners a salvational
led to believe that they were dependent on the phys- path to individual enlightenment, the “Bridge to
ical universe, and thus on bodies, in order to func- Total Freedom”, and each practitioner moves up
tion on this planet. Scientology aspires to teach its through the extensive soteriological hierarchy
practitioners how to gain the gnosis that the thetan through a long series of initiations in a codified pre-
is not dependent upon anyone or anything in the scribed sequence. The goal is to move the individ-
physical universe, and is capable of taking control ual to higher and higher states of consciousness and
over himself and the events in his or her existence. orders of existence towards the ultimate enlighten-
Each thetan or individual has existed through an ment. Furthermore, the intention is to make the
endless amount of incarnations on this planet and person capable of existing without the deplorable
others, during hundreds of millions of years, and dependence upon the body and the physical uni-
every single incident occurring to each and every verse. The gnosis presented by Hubbard is legally
body throughout this mytho-evolutionary history protected by an organization known as Religious
determines who a person is now, how he or she is Technology Center. This unit, within the complex
feeling, and how he or she is functioning both phys- system of Scientology branches, owns all trade-

--- Page 473 ---
1049 SCIENTOLOGY
marks and servicemarks of the world and licensing individuals to court on accusations such as e.g.
of his teachings, so as to ensure that no other infringement of copyright on secret documents.
church, mission or person is using ritual techniques Furthermore, several countries, e.g. Germany, have
that are not a hundred percent in line with Hub- run campaigns not only against the church but also
bard’s original teachings and instructions. against individual scientologists because of a fear
Because of the nature of its worldview, Scientol- of what is perceived as the totalitarian character of
ogy can be seen as belonging within the domain of the organization. These court cases and govern-
Western esotericism. However, Scientology can mental attacks on the church have been supported
also be called “esoteric” in the sense of “secret reli- by massive media campaigns throughout the West-
gious tradition”, for at least three interrelated rea- ern world not only in regard to the specific actions
sons. First, its soteriological system is considered to taken by the governments and other institutions
gradually initiate the individual into higher and but also, on a more general level, because of a gen-
higher states of awareness and gnosis. Without eral distrust of what is considered a totalitarian
these initiations there can be no progress and no multinational that is accused of harassing individ-
salvation. Second, the soteriological hierarchy is uals in and outside the Church, of tiring out its crit-
constituted by several steps of which the upper lev- ics, and of publicly throwing suspicion on any
els, called the OT levels (OT meaning Operating individual who does not sympathize with church
Thetan), are considered harmful to persons with no practice. The secrecy surrounding the soteriology
suitable initiation. The steps must be taken in the of the Church seems to contribute to this tense
correct sequence and persons already initiated can- atmosphere.
not speak to others about their ritual experience. Today Scientology is present on all continents, in
Although it is known in Scientology circles that the more than 145 countries. The Church estimates
truths revealed in several of the OT levels are that 8 million people worldwide are using Hub-
obtainable in Hubbard’s publications available to bard’s religious and therapeutic techniques one
all scientologists, for instance Scientology: A His- way or the other. Not all of these people are
tory of Man (1952), discipline and selfdiscipline devoted members, however. Most of them are
are supposed to prevent scientologists from trying clients that buy books and take courses, and go
to obtain the gnosis outside the context of the rit- through rituals on a regular basis without consid-
ual initiations. Third, it is not only the presence of ering themselves scientologists. The estimation of
specific secret teachings and rituals that makes the the Church includes all individuals that are on the
religion esoteric. The system of guidance and main- scientological mailinglists, and it might be fair to
tenance of the religious secrets not only demarcates etimate that no more than one million people are in
initiates from not-yet-initiates within the religion fact active scientologists worldwide.
itself, but also implies that the religion holds cer-
tain religious truths that can never be obtained by L. Ron Hubbard, Dianetics: The Modern Science of
outsiders. Esotericism in the sense of > secrecy is Mental Health, Copenhagen: New Era Publications
International, Aps., 1950/1989 @ idem, Science of Sur-
therefore an important tool of power not only
vival: Prediction of Human Behaviour, Copenhagen:
inside the religious organization but also in Scien- New Era Publications International, Aps., 1951/1989
tology’s relations to the surrounding world. This ¢ idem, Scientology: A History of Man, Copenhagen:
lack of transparency and its distinctive secretive- New Era Publications International, Aps., 1952/1989
ness is one cause for the accusations Scientology ¢ idem, Scientology: The Fundamentals of Thought,
has faced in the public sphere over the years. Still, Copenhagen: New Era Publications International,
Aps., 1956/1989 Church of Scientology Interna-it is clear that it is an important element in Scien-
tional (compilation), What is Scientology?, Los Ange-
tology’s self-perception that Scientology is protect-
les: Bridge Publications, 1992 @ idem, (compilation),
ing the truths, gnosis and the road to freedom The Scientology Handbook, Los Angeles: Bridge Pub-
discovered and systematized by Hubbard while, at lications, 1994.
the same time, protecting individuals from seeking
this knowledge without being properly prepared. Lit.: Dorthe Refslund Christensen, Scientology: Fra
During the Church’s fifty years of history, the Terapi til Religion, Copenhagen: Gyldendal, 1999
atmosphere between the church and its surround- idem, Rethinking Scientology: Cognition and Represen-
tation in Religion, Therapy and Soteriology, forthcom-
ings has been tense. A number of individuals, e.g.
ing @ J. Gordon Melton, The Church of Scientology,
former scientologists and their families, have taken Italy: Signature Books/CESNUR, 2000 # Roy Wallis,
the church to court because of financial controver- The Road to Total Freedom, London: Heinemann Edu-
sies or due to accusations of abuse, for instance in cational Books Ltd., 1976 @ Harriet Whitehead, “Rea-
regard to contracts. The Church, in turn, has taken sonably Fantastic: Some Perspectives on Scientology,

--- Page 474 ---
SCIENTOLOGY 1050
Science Fiction and Occultism”, in: Irving I. Zaretsky tradition. If it is about excluding and including,
& Mark P. Leone, Religious Movements in Contempo- about handing down knowledge, texts, or rituals to
rary America, Princeton: Princeton University Press, a privileged person or group, the secret needs to be
1987, 547-587 # Joseph A. Winther, Dianetics: A Doc- capable of being transmitted. There is a wide gap
tor’s Report, New York: Julian Press, Inc., 1951.
between secrecy on the one hand and > mysticism
DORTHE REFSLUND CHRISTENSEN on the other, in the sense that secrets can be articu-
lated, accessed and transmitted, with severe restric-
tions, whereas mystical experiences, including the
Scot, Michael > Michael Scot emotional impact of secret acts, defy formulation.
The ineffable may be a private secret; it is not a
Secrecy I: Antiquity social one and must be treated elsewhere.
In the second place, there are numerous cases of
1. INTRODUCTION 2. SECRET KNOWLEDGE supposed secrecy, which on closer inspection turn
3. SECRET ACTS 4. SECRET IDENTITIES out to be something else. If outsiders are excluded
from witnessing certain rituals, because the place
1. INTRODUCTION where these rituals are performed, the dwelling
The only fruitful way to study secrecy in ancient place of a god, must be protected from pollution (as
cultures and religions is to study it as a social phe- is the case in Zoroastrian fire-temples or in the two
nomenon. The private secrets of individuals, that is holy cities of Islam), this does not automatically
knowledge of facts kept hidden from everyone (for characterise these rituals or places as secret. On the
example a woman who hides from her husband the contrary, the rituals may be witnessed in priestly
fact that the child she is bearing is not his), are not schools, where they are being taught to students,
only lost to us forever, but also do not really consti- elaborate descriptions of these rituals and places
tute a subject that could be analysed profitably. That can be found in priestly and scholarly literature and
is why, following a lead from the German sociologist all “insiders” are welcome to observe and tell
Georg Simmel, secrecy in antiquity as an object of about them in every detail. Characterising such rit-
study is most often said to have a “triadic” nature: uals as secret betrays a typical “third party” point
the three activities of “concealing”, “keeping hid- of view, but is incompatible with the intentions of
den” and “revealing” knowledge involve, in turn, at the other two parties.
least three parties: two people who share the secret We know both more and less than people in
and a third party, the ones who do not know it. antiquity. We know more, because we can dig up
Secrecy in social life is a double-faced phenome- ancient sites and structures that would have been
non. It is in many cases socially and psychologically closed to the majority of the population in antiq-
productive and produces feelings of identity and uity. We know something, for example, of the
belonging among those who share the secret, but it layout of the cult-places of the god Mithras
can also be disruptive to the point of annihilating (mithraea), which were hidden from sight in the
social structures, such as family relations or politi- ancient world, and we can study Mithraic art that
cal alliances. As a concept, both insiders and out- was hidden in these sanctuaries. We can study
siders exploit it: those who guard a secret may use papyri and texts that would have circulated only
it to increase their personal prestige or to make among a few privileged members of a guild or a
their group seem more attractive, whereas out- religious association. That we know less is obvious:
siders can launch the suspicion of subversive secrets that were transmitted orally, including the
secrecy to mobilise feelings of rage among those interpretation of Mithraic art, for instance, are lost
excluded, and use it as a weapon against opponents to us, together with the vast majority of texts, loca-
or to divert attention from their own activities. tions, and artefacts. Our knowledge is restricted
All ancient religions were characterised by a cer- not by codes of secrecy, for there would be no one
tain amount of secrecy. Certain restrictions could to enforce them, but by the vicissitudes of history.
apply to parts of the temple; there were rituals What we know or can reconstruct, can be treated
without any human audience, featuring only the here under three headings: secret knowledge (texts,
god and his priest, and knowledge and texts could names, myths and their explanations, etc.); secret
be kept out of reach from all but a few trusted ones. acts (chiefly rituals); and secret identities.
A few further distinctions must be made here,
before we can analyse the concept and the working 2. SECRET KNOWLEDGE
of secrecy in the ancient world. To be able to speak of “secret” knowledge, we
In the first place, secrecy is connected with pub- must first tackle its opposite, the “public” nature of
licity and with accessibility, in other words, with knowledge in antiquity. Estimates of literacy rates

--- Page 475 ---
IO5I SECRECY I: ANTIQUITY
for any ancient culture rarely rise above ten per- the initial stages of purification and instruction,
cent. This means that “published” works in writing seems to be a modern preoccupation. The common
were inaccessible to the vast majority of the popu- ground between the two is the factor of experience:
lation. In the political processes, including deliber- the knowledge revealed transforms the person who
ations on government and justice, only a few (for receives it. To hand it out to those without prepa-
instance, local, free-born men of a particular social ration was not seen as offensive as much as it was
background) could participate. Practical knowl- pointless: it would not work. This, at least, seems
edge in crafts and trade was passed on in the fam- to apply to the often-encountered injunction to
ily or in guild structures. Education, again, was keep things secret in the history of Platonism,
most often neither public nor free and for many whose texts frequently stress the fact that people
people either impossible to reach or undesirable. In may laugh at the knowledge that is being handed
religious matters, the situation was not much dif- down.
ferent. The primary /ocus of religious socialisation What was handed down? One common denom-
was the family. Those who chose religion as their inator in the content of the secret traditions seems
vocation or were destined for a job in a religious to be living truths underlying ordinary things: the
organisation were taught their rituals and other (nature of the) gods, stories about the gods, texts
practical knowledge by their older colleagues in a that were read by everyone and the world sur-
style not unlike the tradition of craft knowledge. rounding us. Under the right guidance, a new inter-
There is a striking difference between the ancient pretation of all these sources of information could
civilisations of the Near East and Egypt on the one lead to other, better understandings of reality. This
hand and the institutions of the ancient Greeks is, of course, a claim common to all systems of
and Romans on the other. In Mesopotamia, in par- instruction and does not necessarily require codes
ticular, priesthood was often a lifelong vocation, of secrecy or extensive preparations, but it is cer-
involving enormous amounts of study, both in tainly characteristic of these secret traditions. A
order to be able to perform the required rituals and second element is the defragmentation of reality:
to acquire a solid grounding in theology and litera- whereas our common experience naturally leads us
ture. In Greece and Rome, by contrast, priesthood to a fragmented view of reality (a myth is relevant
was rarely associated with learning in this sense. to a particular subject, a hymn is sung to please a
Priesthoods were often honorary positions that did god of choice, literature serves an aesthetic experi-
not preclude other vocations, required little formal ence and mathematics are useful for measuring or
training and were rarely associated with the trans- trading, etc.), the hidden teachings would most
mission of more knowledge than was required for often stress the interrelatedness of all these things.
the performance of one’s duties. It is not surprising, Almost every aspect of human culture and experi-
therefore, that the concept of “secret knowledge” ence could be presented in the light of overarching
received a much greater emphasis in the context themes that one would not ordinarily associate
of the religions of the Near East than it did in the with them. The typical subjects of these overarch-
context of the public religions of the Greeks and ing theories were the (organisation of the) cosmos,
Romans, even though in both clusters of civilisa- the human soul and his mind and the reality of the
tions, religion was very much a state affair. divine. In the interrelations between these subjects,
Among the Greeks, the concept of secret knowl- reality was made much simpler than ordinary (sen-
edge gained more currency in small-scale groups of sory) experience would lead us to believe and at the
a teacher with his pupil(s). In these groups, exem- same time was thought to reveal profound truths
plified by Pythagoras and Empedocles, for instance that would transform a person’s life.
(or what the tradition made of them), knowledge The third element that must be stressed is the
was passed on that was felt to contain truths about power secret knowledge could bring. The experi-
reality that not every mortal was able or entitled to ence of hidden truths not only changed a person’s
find out. Among a range of options in restricting view of reality or transformed his life, but it also
access to that knowledge, the most common fea- invested him (or her) with hidden powers. Here, in
tures are preparatory purifications, certain pre- particular, belong those elements of secret knowl-
scriptions for the style of living (e.g. dietary rules) edge that would teach the hidden names of divine
and formal or informal teaching, following which beings, which would enable a person to lay them
the hidden truths were destined to be perceived or under his control, the formulas, words, or syllables
experienced by the pupil. The question whether that would influence the course of nature and the
this knowledge was considered too sacred to reveal symbols with which his soul could find a path
to those who were not properly prepared or was beyond this world. None of this knowledge would
thought to be beyond the reach of those without be useful without a proper understanding of their

--- Page 476 ---
SECRECY I: ANTIQUITY 1052
origins or of the workings of reality; revealing them human soul: those who entered the religion could
to the uninitiated could be perceived or presented gain the knowledge necessary for salvation. The
as dangerous, in leading persons to places or stages complex practical rules for the desired lifestyle of
for which they were unprepared, or as pointless, in Manichaeans were based on the realisation of these
giving someone instruments he would be unable insights. Yet, the knowledge itself (among them
to use. Mani’s written works), was by no means “secret”:
One of the most extensive sources for this type of it was, in fact, propagated with great zeal by
“secret knowledge” is the Corpus Hermeticum |> Manichaean missionaries all over the world, with
Hermetic Literature I] which reveals several of the no perceivable restrictions. Gnosticism was, there-
characteristics mentioned above: the visionary set- fore, not by definition secretive, and the differences
ting of the Poimandres (CH 1), for instance, in between “exoteric” Christianity and “esoteric”
which truths are revealed, first, in visual experi- Gnostic Christianity are more a matter of emphasis
ence, and then explained by a divine teacher. The than of substance.
texts of the CH frequently explore the subject of
silence: it is only in silence, in speechless words and 3 OTe CRE TAs tS
soundless song, that the mind can access God. The language used in the section on “secret
Secrecy is also enjoined explicitly, especially in CH knowledge” comes very close to the language nec-
XIII, which contains a ‘secret hymn’ that is said essary for secret rituals, to the language of initia-
to be a ‘secret kept in silence’ and may not be tion and mystery cults. The most important secret
divulged. The reasons for this silence and secrecy from the ancient world without any doubt was the
are located in the ‘suppression of all the senses’ experience of the Mysteries of Eleusis. A large
(CH X.5) necessary for true understanding. number of the citizens of Athens took part in these
It is much more difficult to locate “secret knowl- Mysteries in some stage of their lives, and the
edge” in those traditions that belong more firmly in “secret”, therefore, must have been widely known.
the orbit of Christianity, such as Gnostic varieties It was guarded and enforced with much energy. It
of Christianity [> Gnosticism] and ~ Manichae- is widely assumed that the other mystery cults of
ism. In “mainstream” Christian texts and tradi- antiquity, including those of the so-called “Orien-
tions themselves, the concept of secrecy (and its tal” deities (Cybele, Mithras, Isis, etc.) in part emu-
companion, “mystery”, which originally belongs lated the Mysteries of Eleusis. The secrecy of the
to the realm of initation) is often used, as is the idea rituals, in most cases, functioned as a “control for
of “revealing” hidden messages. It is a moot point, experience”, although it could be formulated in
however, whether this knowledge was considered different terms. In Athenian law, “profaning” the
the special reserve of initiated members of a certain Mysteries (i.e., revealing them either by describing
group, or rather knowledge available to all those them in words or by acting them out) was punish-
willing to acquire it. It is often assumed that in the able by death. This was certainly not the case with
development of Christianity, the “esoteric” charac- the other, private, mystery cults, but in all cases
ter of texts and ideas gave way to the appeal to secrecy seems to have served the same purpose:
broader audiences quite early, leaving a void in to ensure the emotional impact of undergoing the
“experiential knowledge” that came to be filled by ritual. Revealing the rituals and their symbols
Christian mysticism. In this schematic approach beforehand not only meant transgressing sacred
to the development of the traditions (of which institutions, but also spoiling the effects the ritual
G.G., Stroumsa’s work is an outstanding example), was supposed to accomplish.
Gnostic texts are frequently thought to display a This, however, should not be pushed to its
longer continuation of early Christian secret or ini- extreme. If the reports we have of some of the ritu-
tiatory knowledge. Certainly, many of the texts als in the mystery cults are correct (and even
from the Nag Hammadi codices stress the secret though the majority derives from hostile early
nature of knowledge preserved in those texts. Since Christian authors, there is little reason to doubt the
we know so little about the patterns of organisa- accuracy of some of them), candidates for initia-
tion of “Gnostic” Christians, however, it is by no tion in, for instance, the several grades of the mys-
means certain that there were definite, imposed, teries of Mithras, knew at least some of the rituals
restrictions in the access to this knowledge. The beforehand, for they were supposed to do certain
case of Manichaeism may be a good illustration: things during these rituals for which they had to be
from the organisation of the religion, it is clear that prepared (the best example is the initiation to the
it was centred around the possibility of acquiring Miles-grade, during which the candidate had to
knowledge of the true origin of the world and the shake off a wreath placed on his head and proclaim

--- Page 477 ---
1053 SECRECY I: ANTIQUITY
solemnly, “Mithras is my wreath”). In general, it oped among certain Gnostic Christians: a ritual of
seems plausible to assume that the secrecy of cer- redemption (apolytrosis), and the rites of the
tain initiation rituals was kept as a control for “bridal chamber” are among them. The details of
experience of the candidates, whereas the secrecy these rituals are only poorly known, but their great
of the rituals in regular meetings (ritual meals, for importance is stressed both by early Christian
instance) lay more in the special significance these opponents of Gnosticism and in Gnostic literature
rituals were thought to have and the wish to cele- (e.g. the Gospel of Philip).
brate these in a fitting manner with initiated mem-
bers only. 4. SECRET IDENTITIES
The rituals affecting the course of things in the It is beyond doubt that the secrecy of certain
cosmos were of a different nature. These belong groups was a major element in their attraction to
more to the realm of “secret knowledge”. There is outsiders. From a sociological point of view,
a sizeable body of literature from late antiquity, enforcing secrecy about the inner workings of a
drawn from many confessional groups, which gives group, about the knowledge handed down and the
instructions to people wishing to perform rituals to rituals performed, helps to raise the prestige of the
attain a certain goal, in transforming their own group. Ina tolerant, benign world, this seems to be
lives or in influencing their surroundings. The mag- the most important aspect of secrecy: apart from
ical papyri belong to this group, as do the possibly being a control for experience, it is an instrument
more public discussions and manuals of Neopla- to attract new following. This certainly seems to be
tonic theurgy [> Neoplatonism] and handbooks true for the mystery cults, which could thrive in the
and ritual instructions from Christians, Jews, and Hellenistic and Imperial periods by promising per-
others. These are not so much group rituals des- sonal transformation and enrichment without
tined to impose identity on new members, but threatening the political or religious status quo.
specific texts and rituals imparting powers and the The ancient world, however, was not always either
knowledge required for harnessing these powers. tolerant or benign and the history of private reli-
Little is known of the social organisation(s) gious associations also shows the other side of
behind the Hermetic texts. Several scholars (most secrecy. Already in the 5th century B.C.E., the
famously A.J. Festugiére) have doubted whether Pythagoreans of Southern Italy were massacred
there is a social reality behind this literature at all, and the history of religions in the ancient world
but it seems unreasonable to reject this as a possi- shows a large number of incidents in which reli-
bility. If there was an organisation, there must have gious groups were persecuted, outlawed, or exe-
been rituals, but we are very poorly informed about cuted. The final secret to be discussed, therefore, is
these. Hermetism, to be sure, was not a separate the secret identity.
religion with an identifiable “church” hierarchy Mystery cults were, in principle, a private matter
and specially consecrated buildings, etc. The term that would not interfere with a person’s social life.
that seems to have stuck in modern scholarship A person was not obliged to report his member-
to imagine Hermetic “communities” is that of a ships and could choose not to declare it, with the
“lodge”, and from a number of passages in Her- exception of a number of cases: the hierophant of
metic literature, it has been possible to reconstruct Eleusis, for instance, was not allowed to take part
the presence of gatherings of small groups of initi- in other mysteries. Not declaring membership in a
ates, for the singing of hymns, praying, study, and religious organisation therefore did not automati-
a communal meal with symbolic acts. Since the lan- cally imply the urge to keep such membership
guage of initiation lies heavily on these passages, it secret out of fear of persecution. Once an organ-
is reasonable to envisage these rituals as meetings isation had been outlawed, however, this could
for initiates only, in which proximity (or unity) become a real option. The best illustrations we
with the divine could be experienced. have of this concealment of identity belong to the
The rituals of Gnostic Christians are even more history of Christianity and Islam. The traditional
difficult to reconstruct. Most evidence derives from religions of Greeks and Romans did not as a rule
the opponents of Gnostic varieties of Christianity. interfere in the “content” of various cults and
It is most likely that Gnostic Christians knew most organisations. The early Christian churches were
of the rituals that were performed by Christians in not in a position to do so, but the growing central-
general (baptism, anointment, [communal] prayer, isation and authority of the Church brought with it
etc.) and that it was in their interpretation that they repeated attempts to formulate, centralise and con-
differed from other varieties of Christianity. In trol the content and the practice of the religion
addition, special rituals seem to have been devel- (ideas, exegesis and ritual), which led to the exclu-

--- Page 478 ---
SECRECY I: ANTIQUITY 1054
sion of a large variety of different interpretations ity in the later middle ages. This rhetoric, adopted
and practices. From the moment the Church gained from a host of neoplatonic [~ Neoplatonism] and
sufficient power to do so, this exclusion had in it the Hermetic sources [> Hermetic Literature] into var-
danger of persecution. Secrecy, or rather the pre- ious branches of Islamic natural philosophy, was
sumption of secrecy, was used as a weapon in this imported into Western Europe in the many works
battle: persons, ideas, texts, and rituals were “un- of natural philosophy, > astrology and > magic
masked” in attempts to stamp out heresy. It is cer- which began drifting from Arabic sources into the
tain that many groups were anything but secretive eager hands of Latin translators and writers in the
in their interpretation of the requirements of Chris- 12th century. In regard to the popularity of the lit-
tianity, but several groups indeed chose the option erature of secrets in the later middle ages, it is
of outward assimilation to mainstream Christian- important to note that in the 12th through r5th
ity, while concealing their particular interpretations centuries, secular learning (education in the liberal
and rituals. It is in Shiite Islam that this practice arts and philosophy) gains considerably in eco-
came to be institutionalised in the right to dissimu- nomic importance with the rise of the universities;
lation (taqiya) in the face of danger to one’s life. In and at the same time, and connectedly, due to the
the world of antiquity, secret identities were most strengthened influence of neoplatonic thinking,
often figments of the imagination and instruments worldly knowledge comes increasingly to be
for repression. understood as a kind of integument for divine
knowledge (as well as, in some representations, a
Lit.: K.W. Bolle (ed.), Secrecy in Religions (Studies in means by which it may be attained). Books claim-
the History of Religions 49), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1987 ing to disseminate the secret knowledge of the
R. van den Broek, “Religious Practices in the Hermetic
ancients or provide knowledge of the liberal arts
‘Lodge’: New Light from Nag Hammadi”, in: R. van
den Broek & C. van Heertum (eds.), From Poimandres and philosophy through esoteric or magical means
to Jacob Bohme: Gnosis, Hermetism and the Christian may have been particularly attractive to the emerg-
Tradition, Amsterdam: In de Pelikaan, 2000, 78-95 @ ing class which could only sometimes afford the
W. Burkert, Lore and Science in Ancient Pythago- cost of a liberal arts education; but struggling
reanism, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, young clerics and professionals were not the only
1972 @ P. Kingsley, Ancient Philosophy, Mystery,
people to read and take seriously the literature and
and Magic. Empedocles and Pythagorean Tradition,
rhetoric of secrets. It is possible to find suggestions Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995 # H.G. Kip-
penberg & G.G. Stroumsa (eds.), Secrecy and Conceal- adumbrated in different kinds of medieval writing
ment: Studies in the History of Mediterranean and (as for example in the De reductione artium ad
Near Eastern Religions (Studies in the History of Relli- theologiam of St. Bonaventure [1221-1274]) that
gions 65), Leiden: E.J. Brill, r995 # P.O. Long, Open- some esoteric knowledge might be a regular part of
ness, Secrecy, Authorship: Technical Arts and the
normal learning, or that normal learning might
Culture of Knowledge from Antiquity to the Renais-
lead to divine knowledge; the liberal arts thus
sance, Baltimore/London: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 2001 @ G. Simmel, “The Sociology of Secrecy might be seen as a key to the divine as well as mun-
and of Secret Societies”, American Journal of Sociol- dane worlds. All of these things contributed to the
ogy 11 (1906), 441-498 @ G.G. Stroumsa, Hidden ethos which made the rhetoric and literature of
Wisdom: Esoteric Traditions and the Roots of Christ- secrets popular.
ian Mysticism (Studies in the History of Religions 70), There were many late medieval books offering to
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1996 @ E.R. Wolfson (ed.), Rending
deliver secrets of art or nature to the reader, often
the Veil: Concealment and Secrecy in the History of
translated from or modelled on Arabic precursors, Religions, New York/ London: Seven Bridges Press,
1999. and containing a wide variety of formulas and
experiments, not always particularly recondite.
ALBERT DE JONG They included medical recipes; traditional lore
about the properties of stars, herbs and stones;
Secrecy II: Middle Ages magical experiments; ethical advice; and advice on
the care of the self. Perhaps the most influential
There has always existed within Christian cul- among books of this type was the Secretum secre-
ture the notion that there are certain forms of torum (in Arabic Sirr al-Asrar), first translated
knowledge hidden from ordinary mortals and from Arabic to Latin in the mid-12th century, and
uniquely available through God to the prophets, purporting to have been written by Aristotle at the
saints and elect (an understanding visible in some request of his student Alexander the Great. The
biblical passages, e.g. Amos 3:7). However, a new book’s medieval audience believed in the attribu-
rhetoric of secrecy begins to emerge into popular- tion to Aristotle, and as the popularity of Aristo-

--- Page 479 ---
IOSs SECRECY II: MIDDLE AGES
tle’s genuine works increased, so too did the popu- primarily with natural or medical “secrets”. While
larity of the Secretum secretorum, which was elaborating their information within an astrologi-
understood to contain the esoteric side of his doc- cal framework [> Astrology], these books did not
trine. The two versions of the work came to exist in really push the envelope of normal medieval natu-
many manuscript copies, and were translated from ral philosophy.
Latin into many vernacular languages. Alchemical literature [-> Alchemy] began to
In the mid-13th century a Latin edition of the enter the magical/spiritual stream in a more obvi-
Secretum was prepared with comments and anno- ous way, though what counted as secret knowledge
tations by > Roger Bacon, on whom the work in alchemy might be implied to be at times technical
clearly had a strong influence, and the understand- and practical, at times spiritual, at times both at
ing of secrecy he found there is adapted and para- once. Certainly it is also true in alchemy that the
phrased by him in many of his own works. Bacon’s secrets of art and nature are interwoven with the
motivations for an interest in secrecy were inten- secrets of God. To the end of concealing such
sified by his frequently expressed concern to keep secrets from the common crowd, some medieval
important information out of the hands of the alchemical books were written in enigmatic or
Antichrist, mingled with a desire for the education encrypted language; but even the more apparently
of the Christian world, to the end that they might straightforward of them typically gestured in the
rediscover knowledge hidden from human beings opening pages at the need for enigmatic language
since ancient times but intended to be restored in to keep the secrets of alchemy from the unworthy
time for the coming apocalypse. Like many others, (frequently of course insisting on the importance of
Bacon accepted the claim of the Secretum to trans- clarity at the same time). For example in the pref-
mit lore which contained the divine wisdom ace to the Libellus de alchimia attributed to Alber-
granted to the saints and prophets; but it is clear tus Magnus, the author proposes to write of ‘the
that this lore is conceived of as the secrets of par- true art, clear and free from error; however in such
ticular causes of things in nature (not that this a way that seeing they may not see, and hearing
excludes divinity, as he notes: ‘when we speak of they may not understand’, and goes on to adjure
the power of particular agents, we do not exclude the reader to hide the book from the foolish (Libel-
the regimen of the universal agent and first cause’ lus, 3). In alchemical writings, the “secrets” im-
[Epistola, c. 3]). Thus Bacon’s rhetoric of secrecy parted through the text might also suggest
wraps itself around an idea of normal knowledge something akin to an initiatic secret, a spiritual
too: the “secrets” of Art and Nature, which are not knowledge that could be achieved only by an
more than the wise philosopher might deduce, are operator who had gone through certain steps of
also not less than secrets of God. purification and learning. In the Ordinal of
Clearly in the Secretum Secretorum, as in Alchemy of Thomas Norton (ca. 1433-1513), the
Bacon’s reception of it, the spiritual/magical and reader is enjoined that no one can attain the science
the mundane/technical streams of thought were unless God send him a master, and that while
not always readily distinguishable. This is certainly he must choose a successor to receive the knowl-
the case for many works in which the rhetoric of edge after he dies, he is bound by sacred oath not
secrecy is manifest. Sometimes, however, particular to teach it to anyone, not even to his own chil-
books seemed to run more in one channel than dren, unless virtue prove them worthy (Ordinal,
another. In the more mundane/technical stream € ii, Wome),
might be found books like the Secretum philo- Most thoroughly steeped in the magical/spiritual
sophorum: a late 13th century text structured in channel of literature containing the rhetoric of
seven chapters co-ordinated with each of the seven secrecy we find a variety of different works of a
liberal arts. The apparent concern with the normal theurgic or necromantic character concerned chiefly
scheme of knowledge suggested by arrangement with the principles of or rituals for the invocation
around the liberal arts is not quite carried out in the and/or binding of spirits. This somewhat heteroge-
content, though this remains mundane enough, for nous category would include necromantic hand-
some of the chapters contain simple party tricks books, works adapted from Arabic precursors like
and ways of deceiving the senses, while others are the Liber de essentia spirituum, and Picatrix (or
filled with instructions for such things as the mak- Ghayat al-Hakim), and texts probably of Hebrew
ing of pigments or experiments to be performed origin like the Sworn Book of Honorius and Ars
with flasks and retorts. In other works, such as the notoria, which emphasize a direct approach to
Secrets of Galen (or Rasis), or the Secrets of Women divine knowledge. For the most part works of rit-
attributed to > Albertus Magnus, the concerns are ual magic (including those of the necromantic type)

--- Page 480 ---
1056
SECRECY II: MIDDLE AGES
insist on the purity of the operator as strongly or and Early Modern Culture, esp. Part I, Princeton:
even more strongly than the alchemical books do, Princeton University Press, 1994 # John B. Friedman,
“Safe Magic and Invisible Writing in the Secretum
and some also manifest concern with something
Philosophorum”, in: C. Fanger (ed.), Conjuring Spirits:
akin to an initiatic secret. The Sworn Book, for Texts and Traditions of Medieval Ritual Magic,
example, purporting to be the only work to contain Stroud, Gloucestershire: Sutton Publishing, 1998, 76-
the true knowledge of > magic, begins with a nar- 87 @ Richard Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle Ages,
rative describing a gathering of 811 magicians con- Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989, 140-
vened to address the question of the preservation of 144 @ Robert Mathiesen, “A thirteenth-century Ritual
to Attain the Beatific Vision from the Sworn Book ofthe ancient wisdom in the face of opposition to
Honorius of Thebes”, in: Fanger, Conjuring Spirits,
magic by bishops and prelates. This council agrees
143-162 @ Lynn Thorndike, A History of Magic and
on a set of oaths by which the owner of the book Experimental Science, vol. 2, chapters LXIV-LXV, New
and bearer of its knowledge must be bound, includ- York: Macmillan Company, 1929 @ Steven J. Williams,
ing of course an oath not to reveal the secrets of the “Roger Bacon and the Secret of Secrets”, in: Jeremiah
book to anyone but an appropriate successor. In Hackett (ed.), Roger Bacon and the Sciences: Com-
works of this type, we might feel ourselves to be memorative Essays, Leiden, New York, Koln: E.J. Brill,
very far indeed from the realm of mundane and 1997, 365-391.
practical knowledge; but here too there may be
CLAIRE FANGER
found evidence of a preoccupation with the value
of the entire spectrum of knowledge, not just the
extra-linguistic knowledge implied by the idea of Secrecy III: Modernity
divine revelation. The goal of the Ars notoria, and
following it the Liber visionum ofJohn of Morigny 1. SECRETS WITHIN NATURE AND HISTORY
(fl. 1304-1318), is the infusion into the mind of the (A. THE OCCULT SIDES OF NATURE
operator of the seven liberal arts culminating in the B. THE OCCULT SIDES OF HISTORY)
knowledge of theology. In both works, but perhaps 2. CONCEALMENT AND SECRECY IN RELATION
especially in the Liber visionum, the science of the- TO TEXTS (A. EXPLICIT AND IMPLICIT
ology is represented as a revelation of divine SECRECY B. THE DIALECTICS OF
secrets; but this final revelation requires the attain- CONCEALMENT AND UNVEILMENT IN TEXTS)
ment (also by divine infusion) of the liberal arts as
a preparatory proceeding. Here as elsewhere in the The notion of secrecy is often associated with
medieval literature of secrets, divine secrets and that of > esotericism, even to the point of reducing
normal knowledge are closely contiguous; indeed it the sense of this latter term to that of the former.
sometimes seems that “secret knowledge” is little The typological meaning of “esotericism” as refer-
more than a metonymy for knowledge itself. ring to secrecy should, however, be clearly distin-
guished from the historical meaning used in the
Roger Bacon, Secretum secretorum cum glossis et present reference work and increasingly in general
notulis, in: Robert Steele (ed.), Opera hactenus inedita academic parlance. The problematics of the rela-
Rogeri Baconi, Fasc. V, Oxford: Oxford University
tionship between esotericism and secrecy, then,
Press, 1920 @ “Epistola Fratris Rogerii Baconis de
concerns the question of to what extent and in Secretis Operibus Artis et Naturae et de Nullitate
Magiae”, in: J.S. Brewer (ed.), Rogeri Bacon Opera which forms secrecy is present within the dis-
Quaedam Hactenus Inedita, London: Longman, Green courses of the representatives of Western esoteric
and Roberts, 1859, 523-550 @ Libellus de Alchimia currents.
ascribed to Albertus Magnus, Berkeley and Los Angeles: Given the centrality in modern and contempo-
University of California Press, 1958 @ Thomas Nor-
rary Western esotericism of > correspondences, in
ton’s Ordinal of Alchemy, John Reidy (ed.), London,
particular, related to concepts of living nature, New York, Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1975.
imagination, and mediations, it comes as no sur-
Lit.: Jean-Patrice Boudet, “LArs Notoria au moyen prise that esotericists evince a tendency to look for
age: une résurgence de la Théurgie antique?”, in: La hidden meanings they assume to exist beneath the
Magie: Actes du Colloque international de Montpellier, surface of the empirically observable world. In this
25-27 Mars 1999 (Tome III: Du Monde Latin au understanding, Nature, History, and the works of
Monde Contemporain), Montpellier: Séminaire d’étude
humankind present themselves as a network of
des mentalités antiques, 2000, 173-191 @ William
Eamon, “From the Secrets of Nature to Public Knowl- interrelated “signatures”; in other words, apparent
edge: The Origins of the Concept of Openness in Sci- reality is replete with secrets. That aspect is the sub-
ence”, Minerva 23 (1985), 321-347 @ idem, Science ject of the first part of this entry. The second part
and the Secrets of Nature: Books of Secrets in Medieval concentrates on the very discourse of many esoteri-

--- Page 481 ---
LO$7 SECRECY III: MODERNITY
cists, which purports to have something secret in it, half of the r9th century, liked to emphasize that
and/or is characterized by a dialectics of conceal- still uncompleted or unfinished products of natural
ment and unveiling. processes are reluctant, as it were, to appear in
broad daylight, lest the light should kill them, as
1. SECRETS WITHIN NATURE AND exemplified by the foetus, the roots of plants, cer-
HISTORY tain underdeveloped species living in the dark (like
batrachians), and so on.
A. THE OCCULT SIDES OF NATURE It is telling that in alchemical literature [>
Before the dawn of modern science, Nature as a Alchemy] the concept of secret or secrecy, far from
whole appeared — not only among esotericists — as always having the sense of intentional conceal-
a terra incognita full of occult [> occult / ment, frequently refers, rather, to the existence of
occultism] correspondences. The term philosophia “secret energies”. This is exemplified by the widely
occulta refers in great part to such a view, for disseminated Lexicon Alchemiae (1614) by Martin
instance in the title of one of the most influential Ruland, which has no entry for “secret” or “se-
books of Renaissance esotericism, De occulta crecy”, but does have one for “Arcanum”, defined
philosophia (1533), by — Heinrich Cornelius as ‘something secret, uncorporeal, which Man can-
Agrippa. That view was to prevail also among not know without experimentation. This virtue
paracelcists [> Paracelsianism], Theosophers [> proper to any one thing operates one thousand
Christian Theosophy], Rosicrucians [- Rosi- times more effectively than that thing itself [in
crucianism]|, etc. (the more recent substantive which the Arcanum is contained]’. Indeed, Nature
occultism has been used ina similar sense, although and Man are seen by alchemists as containers of
it had and still has other meanings as well). Occult secret energies or seminal forces which it behooves
correspondences within Nature are seen as operat- the “philosopher” to know how to use. In such a
ing at various levels of reality and as constituting, context, imagination constitutes a power of unveil-
like Holy Scripture, an allegorical and symbolical ing that operates through the images and symbols
unfolding of mysteries. “Occult philosophy” is of the myth and makes visible what would other-
therefore a matter of deciphering the signatura wise have remained in darkness.
mundi in order to discover methods of finding
one’s way through correspondences (between, for B. THE OCCULT SIDES OF HISTORY
instance, plants, metals, parts of the human body, Not only Nature is the object of esoteric inter-
etc.). “Signatures” are seals that, once opened, do pretations, but also the whole history of mankind.
not so much unveil closed, definite meanings as History, as it presents itself in the form of docu-
they make new significations appear which, in mented events and visible traces, is full of gaps that
turn, lead back to others, thereby providing ever are not just the result of a lack of empirical data.
new insights. Indeed, concrete, tangible events are not what they
To this view three main ideas are attached. First, would seem to be at face value (in that sense, the
Nature likes to hide herself and, at the same time, notion of secret History leads us back to the classi-
be known. Second, she is full of secret energies. cal distinction between the orders of the profane
Third, a creative - imagination is the means by and the sacred). In the context of the modern eso-
which Man has access to her secrets. The image of teric corpus, the idea often appears, for example,
the goddess Isis as representing the invisible cre- that one secret > tradition has been running for
ativity of Nature is a commonplace one, well centuries through the apparent diversity of the
beyond the borders of esoteric literature proper. philosophical and religious ones. That tradition is
When masonic Rites happen to be of an esoteric often believed to be maintained by certain people
bent, they occasionally quote the inscription that, who ensure its continuity, despite its invisibility on
according to Plutarch, was to be read on the Tem- the public stage. According to > René Guénon (see’
ple of Sais: “No mortal ever lifted my veil”. This his Le Roi du Monde, 1927), there exists some-
resonates with the Platonic idea (see the Timaeus) where in this world a hidden spiritual centre regu-
that the phenomena of Nature have an origin not lating the life of humans. Before him, > H.P.
likely to be directly grasped. The metaphor “secret Blavatsky had tried to convince her readers of the
bosom of Nature” used by > Scottus Eriugena, existence of Mahatmas, a group of sages or initi-
referring to her proclivity to operate secretly, is ates in India and Tibet who oversee the destiny of
echoed by what > Paracelsus called mysterium the world. Many esoteric or para-esoteric conver-
magnum. Similarly, > Franz von Baader, the main sations bear on an alleged secret of the Knights
representative of Christian theosophy in the first Templar [> Neo-Templar Traditions], purported

--- Page 482 ---
SECRECY III: MODERNITY 1058
to have been the link — the missing one, for the eso- gious history is made of) are able to understand the
tericizing historian — between the Gnostics [> play; the audience has no access to it.
Gnosticism] and the Cathars [> Catharism] on the
one hand, and the Rosicrucians and the Free- 2. CONCEALMENT AND SECRECY IN
masons [> Freemasonry] on the other. Such ideas REVATION TOyLEX@S
have been instrumental in nurturing conspiracy In esoteric texts the secret may be either explicit
syndromes which fuelled the inspiration of pulp or implicit. Moreover, we often find various forms
fictions of an anti-esoteric bent. Umberto Eco made of interplay or dialectics between concealment and
a vivid and spicy use of such literature in his novel unveiling.
Il pendolo di Foucault (1988).
A typical example of secret History is provided in A. EXPLICIT AND IMPLICIT SECRECY
the 18th century by some esoterically oriented In esoteric milieus an aura of mystery is some-
masonic Rites with side degrees. Two examples are times created around certain personages (Count de
given here, from among many others. Around ~ Saint-Germain or ~ Fulcanelli, for instance),
1750, Baron Karl von Hund attempted to legit- about whom legendary, long-lived stories are put
imize the creation of his esoterically tinged masonic into circulation. One also observes a preference
Rite called Strict Observance by claiming that it for “secret writing” [> Cryptography], to which
was, by way of uninterrupted transmission, the magical powers are attributed (> Johannes Tri-
successor of the Knights Templar, whose existence themius’s famous “steganography”, at the dawn of
had been carried on secretly up to that date. Within the 16th century, remains a classic example). More
such a mythical history, the Knights Templar dis- generally, initiatory rituals, not only those of an
banded by Philip the Fair were to be considered esoteric bent, have their own passwords and secret
one of the various transitional and contingent signs, and their members are theoretically forbidden
forms which a more ancient wisdom had taken on to reveal what is going on during the assemblies.
since the origins of the world. After having been But since initiation often aims at transforming or
revealed to Adam by God, that wisdom had been even transmuting the candidate by providing
preserved from age to age within the bosom of him/her access to a mysterium, secrecy may simply
lodges of initiates. In Hund’s wake, the more eso- mean here that one just could not reveal one’s own
terically tinged masonic Rectified Scottish Rite cre- experience of initiation, not so much because it is
ated by > Jean-Baptiste Willermoz in the 1770s forbidden to do so, but rather because the experi-
had (and still has) its upper degrees instructions ence is ineffable and would therefore remain
based on the teachings of the theosopher > Mar- incomprehensible to a non-initiate. That might
tines de Pasqually and partly on those of > Louis- well be the sense underlying the rule of disciplina
Claude de Saint-Martin. These instructions present arcani among the members of such societies (in
themselves as the unfolding of a comprehensive contradistinction to the law of silence common to
theosophical system bearing, as such, on the hid- political or criminal secret societies, and to confes-
den relations between God, Man, and the universe. sors and lawyers as well). Then again, the claim is
Willermoz and the co-founders of this Rite consid- not uncommon among esotericists that they have
ered a meditation on History as being part of the to refrain from saying all they know, because they
initiation. But since the veracity of their teachings resent the idea of throwing their pearls before the
was not (and could not) be “proved” by resorting swine.
to undisputable documents, the legitimacy of their Besides explicit or deliberate forms of secrecy,
ritual was based on the secret of its origins. The there is the widely spread idea that an implicit
same goes for many rituals of this sort. Thus, the secret exists within some esoteric and/or non-eso-
knowledge on which one prides oneself is true teric works. First, regarding the esoteric ones, it is
because it is grounded in obscurity — the criterion a matter of assuming the presence of covert mean-
of truth is the obscurity of the sources. ings in works that are already esoteric (in the sense
An illuminating parable of secret History is pro- of obviously pertaining to esoteric literature or
vided in Mircea Eliade’s story Adieu (in Bei den art). Such meanings are not always supposed to
Zigeunerinnen, 1980), in which a theatre curtain is have been intentionally concealed. For instance,
pulled down, thus preventing the audience (i.e., the the Christian kabbalists [> Jewish Influences III] of
historians of religions, the observers “from the out- the Renaissance believed to discover in Jewish
side”) from seeing what is happening on the stage. kabbalah the presence of Christian truths. Neo-
Only the actors (i.e., the personages that real reli- Alexandrian hermetists [> Hermetic Literature IV]

--- Page 483 ---
I0§9 SECRECY III: MODERNITY
enjoyed identifying in the Corpus Hermeticum hension of the reader. Second, the secret of the dis-
symbols pertaining to the Christian Trinity. Many course is the non-communication of something
alchemists claim that in the writings of their prede- that is not transmissible. Third, contrariwise, other
cessors, underneath the manifest meanings, other discourses present themselves more as a pedagogi-
layers of meaning lay hidden, which had not neces- cal agenda than a plea for secrecy, and some in this
sarily been inserted on purpose. This is consistent latter category go as far as making a plea for a “des-
with the fact that so many esoteric discourses are occultation of the occult”.
essentially interpretative (i.e., they consist of an A circular discourse challenges the comprehen-
exegesis of texts which in most cases are already sion of the reader. This is a frequent case, and most
exegeses themselves). “Offenbares Geheimnis” often a frustrating one. The author gives the
(“manifest secret”), an apt expression used by > impression that he conceals while revealing and
Goethe, means that a secret within a work beckons, reveals while concealing. He multiplies veils and
as it were, to the reader, informing him/her of its wrappings supposed to be reverberations of a light
presence, regardless of the intention of the author. not very likely to be eventually grasped. Alchemi-
Second, esotericists are not unfrequently bent cal literature in particular is replete with exam-
upon convincing their readers that a secret is con- ples of this stance. Usually, when an alchemist
tained in works (of fiction, painting, sculpture, etc.) speaks about natural substances, he is transferring
which at face value do not present themselves as the universal principles of sympathy and resem-
esoteric. The baffled readers are thus expected to blance into language in such a way that any word
believe that the authors of these works have, unwit- or image becomes the signified of several other
tingly or not, inserted esoteric meanings. Such signifieds, so that in the end — or even at the out-
endeavours bear witness to the tendency of most set — the distinction between signified and signi-
esotericists of transforming one type of discourse fier becomes blurred. What is upsetting is that we
into another. Thus, Shakespeare’s plays have been feel unable to make out which real, concrete,
the object of esoteric glosses contending that the identifiable metals or liquids are meant. A word or
playwright’s main intention had actually consisted an image refers less to an empirical substance than
in conveying arithmological [~ Number Symbol- it leads back to other words or other images. The
ism], alchemical [> Alchemy] and/or astrological text provides us with would-be information about,
[> Astrology] messages. Holy Scripture has been for instance, the preparation of silver or gold, but
the object of interpretations going far beyond the that information presents itself as being intelligible
common theological ones (particularly in theo- only with reference to the texts of other authors.
sophical discourses, like -> Christian theosophy Even so, the reader who makes the effort to procure
and Jewish as well as Christian kabbalah). ‘In all and read all (or as many as possible) of the texts
times’, writes Umberto Eco, ‘the Hermetic mind hinted at or quoted in the work, finds him/herself
has been transforming the operational jargon of entangled in a circular discourse that ends up by
various crafts into a symbolic language’ (Les limi- functioning as a veil which eventually seems to con-
tes de l’interprétation, ch. Il) - whereby he alludes stitute the message itself. The paradox is that the
to the fact that the vocabulary used by stone text says countless things and, at the same time,
carvers, architects, chemists, and so on, has, over says one main thing to which the reader is not privy
and over again, been utilized in initiatory rituals (see Eco, ibid.).
and hermetic texts. Indeed, alchemists often con- The example of alchemy is paradigmatic in that
sider Greek or Egyptian mythology as an ensemble it can serve to exemplify something that is more or
of cryptic messages that depict the stages and less conspicuous in other esoteric discourses. In
modes of the Great Work. As late as the 20th cen- quite a few of the latter, any text (religious message,
tury, Fulcanelli (Le Mystére des Cathédrales, 1925) philosophical teaching, artistic work, poem, fic-
and other alchemists have scrutinized the cathe- tion, etc.) is supposed to contain a secret which, in»
drals and other spiritual mansions, claiming to find turn, will refer us to another secret, so that there
in statuary and architecture an array of symbols seems to be no ultimate definable secret or truth at
witnessing to an uninterrupted hermetic tradition. all — at least none that is likely to be identified
clearly, or called by its proper name. Bound up with
B. THE DIALECTICS OF CONCEALMENT AND that trait is the preference of many esotericists for
UNVEILMENT IN TEXTS exotic lore, hieroglyphical signs, mythological
Here we have three kinds of examples. First, the figures and settings, and incomprehensible lan-
circularity of the discourse challenges the compre- guages attributed to a remote past. Theosophers

--- Page 484 ---
SECRECY III: MODERNITY 1060
are lavish in circular discourses. Their work rarely these mysteries without making them, by the same
presents itself, in spite of its inner coherence, as sys- token, stale? How to speak about, say, the Spirit
tematic sets of orderly devised propositions, but who is the concealed motor, the hidden driving
rather as puzzles made up of scattered elements, so force of History? As such, he is inexpressible, there-
that the reader is challenged to organize the latter fore non-transmissible by way of any discourse, let
into a more linear or chronological story. Many alone by printed texts, which are liable to falling
theosophers are inspired by an inner central vision into the hands.of readers unable to grasp heir inner
(Zentralschau) that radiates in all directions. They core. Here the plea for secrecy again comes into
are prone to employ words or images in a both lit- play, understood, as it were, as the needle of a com-
eral and figurative sense, and these words or images pass pointing to a mythical “Orient” and serving to
moreover contain various levels of interrelated mask the impossibility of transmission. In this
occult meanings likely to be illuminated by other understanding, esoteric transmission cannot unveil
passages in the same text — but the latter turn out to secrets. Rather, it is the non-communication of
lead back to the earlier passages. To understand a what is not transmissible that constitutes the secret.
theosophical text (of Jacob Boehme, for exam- Hence the abundance of discourses that illustrated
ple) entails having succeeded in finding the spot this paradox in the Renaissance and have, in the
from which the author speaks. But in order for us wake of the latter, continued in various forms
to find this spot, we must have understood the text. to bestow on many esoteric texts their specific
That having been said, such a paradox appears to colouring.
be less conspicuous or disheartening in theosophi- Rending the veil: the text is meant as a desoccul-
cal than, for instance, in alchemical literature. tation of the occult. Desoccultation comes in two
The secret of the text is the non-communication main categories, the differences between them lying
of something that is not transmissible. In the eso- in the degree to which the author relates to the tra-
teric context we repeatedly hear that the represen- ditions of the past.
tatives of philosophical and religious traditions of Saint-Martin represents the first category. His
a more-or-less remote past had to veil the inner core intention was not to be secretive, but to deliver his
of their doctrines. At the dawn of modern times, > esoteric knowledge for the benefit of as many read-
Pico della Mirandola set the tone for such a state- ers as possible. To wit, he took from the hothouse
ment in his Oratio de Homini Dignitate. To the of the secret masonic association of the > Elus
same topos, Cornelius Agrippa devoted a famous Coéns the essentials of the theosophical teachings
and influential chapter in his De Occulta Philo- that Martines de Pasqually had meant to be
sophia, entitled “On the silence and cultivation of reserved for his initiates, and he translated >
the things that are secret in religions”. Why so Boehme into a clear French (at least, into a lan-
many discourses about things one is not supposed guage more accessible or fluid than its German
to talk about? Two factors seem to account for that baroque original). In his works, Saint-Martin not
paradox, which apparently began to come to the infrequently resorted to the very style in use among
fore during the Renaissance. First, at the time, the philosophers of the Enlightenment. Indeed, he
Western culture was in the process of becoming a conceived his work as pedagogical, aimed at fos-
culture of the printed book. This resulted in a tering the Regeneration of Man and Nature. Adam
change of paradigms with regard to the transmis- appears here as a child whom God had to educate.
sion of knowledge, which was formerly more Likewise, humankind is engaged in an unceasing
strongly oral in character. Once printed, a teaching process of regenerating education. Saint-Martin
or message found itself bereft of part of its aura. thus developed a “pedagogical theosophy”, as it
The claim that some secrets had been preserved were, aimed at helping any man or woman to med-
orally for the benefit of selected people partly made itate about the essentials of Revelation in order for
up for that loss, as it were. Second, certain people him/her to reach genuine adulthood. Ultimately,
were convinced that the time had come for hith- though, he did not so much undertake a desoccult-
erto concealed mysteries to be made manifest. ing of the occult as he tried to make the occult
Indeed, during the Renaissance, some persons (> available and accessible without reducing myths
Guillaume Postel, for instance) of this persuasion and symbols to concepts. The same could be said of
considered themselves as providential beings com- ~> Franz von Baader in the later period.
missioned by the decrees of secret history to reform Typical of the second category, which is more at
the world. With this in mind they set out to scruti- home in the esoteric landscape of the second half of
nize what had remained concealed in History pend- the 2oth century, is > Raymond Abellio. In con-
ing riper times. But how were they to speak about trast to authors like Saint-Martin and Baader, we

--- Page 485 ---
IO6I SEDACER
are dealing here with a deliberate “desoccultation Pierre Brunel, L’'Ilmaginaire du secret, Grenoble:
of the occult”. Abellio was certainly not committed ELLUG/Université Stendhal, 1998 # Roger Dachez,
to explaining away esoteric or occult traditions “Sources et fonctions de l’histoire secréte chez Willer-
moz et dans la Maconnerie du XVIII°™ siécle”, Poli-
(Western and Eastern: he dabbled in > astrology,
tica Hermetica to (1996), 79-91 @ Philippe Dujardin
the Y-King, the > Tarot, Kabbalah, etc.) by way of
(ed.), Le Secret: Usages et fonctions du secret. Ap-
scientific or pseudoscientific forms of hyper-reduc- proches comparées, Lyon: Editions du CNRS/Presses
tionism. But he was intent upon reducing them all Universitaires de Lyon, 1987 Umberto Eco, The Lim-
to a small number of common denominators which its of Interpretation, Indiana University Press (USA),
he presented in a severe, abstract and geometrical 1990 (original Italian ed. Milan: Fabbri etc., 1990), see
manner; the final result being a geometrical three- chapter II: “Aspects of Hermetic Semiosis” @ Antoine
Faivre, “The Notions of Concealment and Secrecy in
dimensional figure he called “the Absolute Struc-
Modern Esoteric Currents since the Renaissance (A
ture”. It is not by chance that the writing and Methodological Approach)”, in: Elliot R. Wolfson
publication of his work La Structure Absolue (ed.), Rending the Veil: Concealment and Secrecy in
(1965) coincided precisely with the vogue of struc- the History of Religions, New York/London: Seven
turalism in France. Besides, the word “fin”, in the Bridges, 1999, 155-176 @ F. Laroque (ed.), Histoire et
title of his later book La Fin de l’Esotérisme (1973), secret a la Renaissance, Paris: Presses de la Sorbonne
has in French two complementary meanings, i.e., Nouvelle, 1997 # Jean-Pierre Laurant, Le sens cachée
dans loeuvre de René Guénon, Lausanne: LAge
“goal” and “end”. “Goal” refers to the raison
d’Homme, 1975 Jean-Pierre Laurant etc. (eds.),
d’étre of esotericism (that is to say, for Abellio, the Secret, initiations et sociétés modernes (Politica Her-
acquisition of what he considers a genuine gnosis). metica, 5) # idem, “Du secret ésotérique”, Politica
“End” means that esoteric texts of the past become Hermetica 5 (1991), 66-71 @ Jean-Pierre Laurant etc.
unnecessary once their hitherto occult significa- (eds.), L’Histoire cachée entre histoire révélée et his-
tions have been unveiled, which Abellio contends toire critique (Politica Hermetica, 10), 1996 Georg
Simmel, The Secret and the Secret Society (Kurt H.
to have done. Once discovered, truth helps dis-
Wolff, ed.), New York: Free Press, 1950 (1st version
pense with texts. 1906/1908).
3. CONCLUSION ANTOINE FAIVRE
Although very much present in the context of
modern esoteric currents, the notion of conceal-
Sedacer, Guillaume (Guillelmusment or secrecy has varied meanings, so that it
Sedaceril), + 2, 7i1g82would be inadequate to specify the form of thought
common to these currents. It remains that “esoteri-
Very little is known of the life of this Catalan
cism” is still frequently used by scholars as a syn-
Carmelite, except that he benefited, at least during
onym for secrecy (see e.g. Guy G. Stroumsa’s book
the last years of his life, from the protection of the
Esoteric Traditions and the Roots of Christian
Infante John of Aragon (future John I, who reigned
Mysticism, 1996), and by a wide public in the sense
from 1387 to 1395), known for the sympathy he
of hidden knowledge/teachings about a truth
had for the alchemists. The description, preserved
behind the veil (and/or of the means to attain that
in a notarized act, of thirty-four manuscripts that
truth), and of practices of concealment. Admit-
had belonged to Sedacer, makes it possible to deter-
tedly, there is no reason why it should not be so,
mine his three main centers of interest: astronomy/
since the term was intended in that sense from the
+ astrology, medicine and, especially, > alchemy.
moment it came into use in the first third of the
Posterity has retained only the alchemical aspect
r9th century. Nevertheless, in academic parlance it
of his written work, but Sedacer was also the
has come to designate, as already noted, a specific
author of a surgical treatise, which remained un-
corpus of authors and currents, without special ref-
finished and was entitled Ars cyrurgie, a sort of
erence to the notion of secrecy. For these reasons it
summary, written in 1378 for the use of students,
behoves the historian to be cognizant of the con-
of works by Lanfranc (13th century) and his mas-
texts in which the term is used whenever he/she
ter William of Saliceto (ca. 1210-ca. 1280). He was
comes across it. Depending on whether “esoteri-
moreover connected with the medical teaching
cism” refers essentially to secrecy or not, the notion
milieu at the College of Medicine of Montpellier.
of secrecy finds itself either highlighted, or pushed
Sedacer’s two alchemical treatises, Liber alter-
into the background.
quinus and Sedacina totius artis alchimie, are inti-
Lit.: Bernadette Bertrandias (ed.), Le Secret, Clermont- mately connected: the first is a long practica, that is,
Ferrand: CRLMC/Université Blaise Pascal, 1999 a long series of recipes, rather roughly arranged in

--- Page 486 ---
SEDACER 1062
four books. It was from this material that Sedacer edge of the time, acts as a model for many recipes
later drew to compose Sedacina, ordering it, com- for making “stone and not stone” in his works.
pleting it, and supporting it with a theoretical However, even if he repeats several times ‘una via,
introduction, but still maintaining the same plan in unus modus et unus finis’ (a single way, a single
four books. Sedacina, however, suddenly stops process, a single purpose), to emphasize the para-
short in the midst of the second book: the hand of digmatic character of glass making for alchemical
death seems to have interrupted Sedacer in his practice, in his treatises he nevertheless gives many
work. transmutatory recipes not stemming from this
The term sedacina, invented by Sedacer to entitle model. In fact, Sedacer primarily seeks to transmit
his second treatise, well defines the alchemical a whole series of procedures, juxtaposing, as usual
work of the Carmelite Friar. It means not only in such practicae, perfectly proven procedures
“Sedacer’s thing”, but also, by playing on the stemming from metallurgical techniques and indi-
meaning of the Catalan word sedasser (merchant cations with a transmutatory purpose. Some of his
or maker of sieves), the result of putting previous recipes therefore accumulate ingredients and oper-
alchemical texts through a sieve. Indeed, his work ations, with a concern to lose nothing and exclude
is very derivative of treatises extremely widely cir- nothing.
culated as early as the 13th century, that is, among Apart from his fascination with glass, there is
others, De perfecto magisterio of pseudo-Aristotle, another characteristic aspect of Sedacer’s alchemi-
De salibus et aluminibus of pseudo-Razi and Se- cal work: the Carmelite Friar forged a vocabulary
mita recta of pseudo- > Albertus Magnus, to which all of his own, which he substituted systematically
we may add Verbum abbreviatum de leone viridi, a for that of his sources. To begin with, the titles of
text that circulated since the 14th century under > his two treatises are words invented by him:
Roger Bacon’s name. Sedacer largely drew from alterquinus (synonym of alchimicus) and sedacina
these sources, reproducing them word for word (cf. supra). Above all, each substance used in a
and juxtaposing, in some places, passages from dif- recipe is designated by a specific term (for example,
ferent texts, thus developing a true “mosaic”, very lubricus for mercury, rabiz for vinegar or again
characteristic of medieval compilations. Neverthe- stultus saltans for saltpeter). To constitute this
less, Sedacer knew of recent alchemical texts, and stock of words, Sedacer no doubt drew on his
notably the treatises circulating under the names of imagination as well as on various sources, among
~ Arnau de Vilanova and > Ramon Llull, or again which were medical synonymies. He has recourse
the Rosarium by John Dastin. He was moreover to several procedures, but especially uses meta-
the first known alchemical author to cite Ramon phors and terms that originate, he says, from for-
Llull as an alchemical authority. Nevertheless, he is eign languages. For Sedacer, it is a matter of
in disagreement with the ideas expressed by these discouraging the unworthy reader; but, since he is
authors and notably with their rejection of organic careful to give, here and there, synonyms allowing
substances in making the elixir, a rejection that was all this vocabulary to be understood, his coding
provided with a precise theoretical foundation for system does not seem very effective. In addition, an
the first time in the Summa perfectionis of the Latin element of playfulness, and the sheer pleasure of
pseudo-Geber (13th century). For Sedacer, on the inventing verbal puns, certainly also helps explain
contrary, it is quite as possible to make the ‘stone his approach.
and not stone’ (that is, the philosopher’s stone) In brief, Sedacer is a good example of an “ordi-
starting with mineral and vegetable substances as it nary alchemist” of the end of the Middle Ages. His
is from animal ones. In fact, Sedacer’s alchemical work, which did not have much influence but was
work stands completely in the line of De anima well distributed (17 manuscripts are known to this
artis alchimie of pseudo- > Avicenna, one of the day), bears witness to an alchemy essentially ori-
basic texts of alchemy translated and rewritten ented toward practice and concrete manipulations
from the Arabic in the 13th century and on which of matter. However, this does not necessarily imply
most of his sources depend. He himself is not a that he himself put his procedures into practice, as
builder of theories; his alchemy is above all opera- we would expect today; indeed, it would certainly
tive and the clearly sought-for goal is the transmu- be incorrect to see Sedacer as a laboratory man
tation of metals. Even in Sedacina, the theoretical who had tested all his recipes. The practical knowl-
introduction, essentially composed of topoi, is edge to be transmitted was mainly bookish, even if
there only to bring in and justify the long sequence not exclusively so: the emphasis on glass, for exam-
of recipes. However, one substance fascinates him ple, probably originated from a real experiment.
more than any other: glass. The recipe for making The notion of thought experiments — that is to say
glass, which correctly reflects the technical knowl- the mental contemplation of processes that accord-

--- Page 487 ---
1063 SETHIANS
ing to alchemical logic necessarily have to come to niques of divination [> Divinatory Arts] (Urim et
realization — provides another key to understand- Thumim) to the translation of > Gichtel’s Theoso-
ing the relationship taken towards practical phia Practica for the “Bibliothéque rosicrucienne”
alchemy by a man like Sedacer. of René Philipon (1869-1936), and to Hindu
fakirism. However, he suddenly changed his spiri-
Lit.: Pascale Barthélemy, “Un anonyme alchimique tual direction after his encounter with a Lyonnais
dévoilé: le Liber alterquinus”, Archives d’histoire doc-
healer, -> Maitre Philippe, who caused him to real-
trinale et littéraire du Moyen Age 58 (1991), 31-53
ize the absolute superiority of Christ. After this idem, “Du ‘belutage’ alchimique: remarques sur la
méthode de G. Sedacer”, in: Jean-Claude Margolin & meeting, L’Initiation in 1909 announced Sédir’s
Sylvain Matton (eds.), Alchimie et philosophie a la resignation from all the initiatic organizations; he
Renaissance: Actes du colloque international de Tours now founded another network, Les Amitiés spiri-
(4-7 décembre, 1991), Paris: Vrin, 1993, 79-92 @ idem, tuelles, a sort of “interior church” after the fashion
“Le verre dans la Sedacina totius artis alchimie de Guil- of the theosophers [> Christian Theosophy] of
laume Sedacer”, in: Didier Kahn & Sylvain Matton
the end of the 18th century. The group settled in
(eds.), Alchimie: art, histoire et mythes: Actes du ter
colloque international de la Société d’Etude de I’His- Bihorel-les-Rouen, Normandy. Sédir’s thought
toire de l’Alchimie, Paris/Milan: S.E.H.A., Arché, integrated the occultism [> occult / occultism] of
1995, 203-233 @ idem, La Sedacina ou l’Oeuvre au the roth century, which he never completely
crible: L’alchimie de Guillaume Sedacer, carme catalan renounced, considering the Revelation as the
de la fin du XIV® siécle, vol. 1: Etude et outils; vol. 2: résumé and crown of “natural religion” while
Sedacina, édition critique et traduction, suivie du Liber
breaking with the myth of progress. The idea that
alterquinus, Paris/Milan: S.E.H.A., Arché, 2002 ¢
from age to age, esotericism had preserved and
idem, “Les liens entre alchimie et medicine: Lexemple
de Guillaume Sedacer”, in: Chiara Crisciani & Agos- transmitted the purest part of the eternal doctrine
tino Paravicini Bagliani (eds.), Alchimia e medicina nel [~ Tradition] served as the guiding thread in his
Medioevo (Micrologus’s library, 9), Sismel: Ed. del Gal- Histoire des Rose-Croix (History of the Rosicru-
luzo, 2003, 109-130 @ Lynn Thorndike, A History of cians), reprinted by “Les Amitiés spirituelles” in
Magic and Experimental Science, New York, 1923- 1932, a work that would notably inspire > René
1961, vol. 3, 628-632.
Guénon in his Esotérisme de Dante (Dante’s eso-
tericism, 1925). Sédir’s last works were devoted to
PASCALE BARTHELEMY
+ mysticism: Commentaires sur l’Evangile (Com-
mentaries on the Gospel, 1908-1909) and Brévi-
Sédir, Paul (ps. of Yvon Le Loup), aire mystique (Mystical breviary, t910).
Ste, Foal NAN [3.241926 Paris
Urim et Thumim, Paris, 1890 @ Le bienheureux Jacob
This Breton, rather gauche in appearance and Boehme, Paris: Chacornac, 1901 @ Les plantes magi-
fragile in health, was employed in a bank. He had ques, botanique occulte, Paris: Chacornac, 1902 @ Le
fakirisme hindou, Paris: Chacornac, 1906 @ Histoire et
had no special intellectual education before meet-
doctrines des Rose-Croix, Paris: Librairie du XX®
ing > Papus (Gérard Encausse) in 1889 at the siécle, 1910 (several enlarged new editions).
occultist Chamuel’s bookshop La Librarie du Mer-
veilleux. At the time, Papus was running a vast net- Lit.: Robert Caborgne, “Paul Sédir ésotériste chré-
work of periodicals, esoteric teaching, and initiatic tien”, Initiation et science, July-Aug., 1948 @ Philippe
institutions, in a half-learned, half-social enterprise Encausse, Sciences occultes, Paris: Ocia, 1949, 45-56
Jean-Pierre Laurant, L’ésoterisme chrétien en France
in which Le Loup (whose pseudonym Sédir is an
au XIX° siécle, Lausanne: LUAge d’Homme, 1992, 176-
anagram of désir, from > Louis-Claude de Saint- 195.
Martin’s homme de désir, “man of aspiration”)
found his place, writing articles for L’Initiation and JEAN-PIERRE LAURANT
teaching in the Groupe indépendant d’études
ésotériques and the schools that belonged to it. He Sethians
practiced > magic in the company of the alchemist
Albert Poisson (1869-1894), and was initiated into t. THE HERESIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE
almost all the secret societies that Paris had to offer, 2. A MODERN DEFINITION OF SETHIANISM
notably the Martinist Order [> Martinism: Second 3. ASSESSMENT OF THE EVIDENCE
Period] of Papus and the fringe-masonic groups
linked to it. He was also to be found in the Ordre Modern scholarship has as yet reached no agree-
Kabbalistique de la Rose-Croix of + Stanislas de ment whether or not there existed in Late Antiquity
Guaita. Sédir’s publications, usually derivative, a distinct religious group or sect that took its name
also touched on everything, ranging from tech- from Adam’s son Seth (Gen 4:25; 5:3). Whereas

--- Page 488 ---
SETHIANS 1064
some scholars express scepticism (e.g. Wisse), oth- brought about the Flood in order to destroy the
ers feel confident in demarcating a body of Sethian mixed breed that was the product of angels and
literature and in reconstructing the doctrine of a men. But in Noah’s ark there was not only the pure
distinct group of Sethians (e.g. Schenke, Turner). race of Seth, but also Ham who was a descendant
They claim that the Sethians were as much a dis- of angels. Thus evil continued and filled the earth
tinct group as the Valentinians [> Valentinus and even after the Flood. Later on Seth appeared as
Valentinians]. In the following the evidence of Jesus Christ. The doxography of Epiphanius of
ancient heresiology that points to the existence of a Salamis, Panarion, 39, and Filastrius of Brescia,
group or groups of Sethians will be reviewed (r). Diversarum haereseon liber, 3, largely agrees with
Then a modern definition of “Sethianism” will be Pseudo-Tertullian. Lipsius (188-192) accounted
presented (2). A brief assessment of the evidence for this similarity by assuming that all three derive
and an indication of possible topics for further their information from Hippolytus’ of Rome lost
exploration will form the conclusion (3). Syntagma. Epiphanius, however, dimly remembers
having met with a sect of Sethians in Egypt; more-
1. THE HERESIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE over, he claims to have ‘discovered some things
1.1. The first Christian author to mention Sethi- about it in an actual encounter, by inquiry’ (Pana-
ans is Hippolytus of Rome. In Refutatio, V, 19-22 / rion, 39, 1, 2; cf. 26, 17); other things he has gleaned
X, 11 he relates their complex system which is from their literature (ibidem). In Panarion, 39, 5, 1,
based on the interaction of the principles of light, Epiphanius informs us about Sethian pseudepigra-
spirit and darkness. According to his heresiological phy: seven books are ascribed to Seth, others are
scheme, Hippolytus claims that they derive their called Allogeneis (cf. Porphyry, Life of Plotinus 16
doctrine from the ancient physicists, the ancient [see below]; NHC XI, 3 [see below]). Yet another
theologians Musaios and Linus, and Orpheus (V, book is apparently called Apocalypse of Abraham
20, 1. 4). Hippolytus refers to the ‘numberless trea- (see below; cf. Puech, 1936; Origen, in PG 13,
tises’ (V, 21, 1) of the Sethians; one of them has the 1889; this treatise should not be confused with
title Paraphrasis of Seth (V, 22, 1). Perhaps this another writing with an identical title, cf. J.H.
book title inspired the designation of “Sethians”; Charlesworth [ed.], The Old Testament Pseude-
apart from it, Seth is mentioned only once as one of pigrapha, 1, New York 1983, 683); there were also
the three sons of Adam (V, 20, 2) and plays no role books under > Moses’ name.
in the “system” of Hippolytus’ Sethians. According 1.4. In Panarion 26 Epiphanius deals with a
to Hippolytus the Sethians recommended to their heresy he calls “Gnostics”. He claims personal
disciples particularly the study of the doctrine of acquaintance (26, 17) and refers, amongst others,
mixture and confusion as taught by, amongst oth- to books called Noria (cf. the reference NHC II, 5,
ers, the Peripatetic Andronicus (V, 21, 1; cf. NHC 102, 10-11, 23-25; for her connection with Seth, cf.
II, 1, 18, 14-19,2 where the section on the passions Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses I, 30, 9; Epiphanius,
agrees with the tradition of Pseudo-Andronicus of Panarion, 39, 5, 2f.), the Gospel of Perfection , the
Rhodos as attested by Cicero, Tusculanae disputa- Gospel of Eve (26, 1, 332, 532, 6); books in the
tiones, IV, 7, 16 [cf. Tardieu, 1986]). Hippolytus’ name of Seth, Greater / Lesser Questions of Mary,
report about the Sethians is part of Hippolytus’ Apocalypses of Adam (cf. NHC V, 5; Cologne
“Sondergut”, i.e. a group of reports about various Mani Codex 48-49 [ed. Koenen—Romer, 30-33];
Gnostic heresies that evince significant parallels of marginal gloss at Epistle of Barnabas 2, 10a in the
thought and wording amongst each other. A proper Codex Hierosolymitanus Graecus Taphou 54 [cf.
evaluation of Hippolytus’ report about the Sethi- Tardieu, 1981, 86]) (26,8,r).
ans presupposes a general analysis of the “Son- 1.5. In Panarion, 40, Epiphanius refutes the
dergut” — a task that has not yet been completed. teaching of the so called + “Archontics”. In this
1.2. Origen refers to a group of heretics that call context he cites their many apocryphal books,
themselves Sethians (in PG 14, 1303D; cf. le Boul- mentioning, amongst others, a Lesser Harmony, a
luec, II, 525, note 300). Greater Harmony, Strangers (Allogeneis) (40, 2,
1.3. Pseudo-Tertullian, Adversus omnes haere- r-3), and books by Seth and under the name of Seth
ses, II, 7, mentions Sethians and gives an account of himself and his seven sons (40,7,4). He adds: ‘For
their teaching different from that in Hippolytus, they say that he had seven sons, called “strangers”,
Refutatio, V, 19-22. Seth plays a prominent role: as I mentioned also in other Sects — I mean the
whereas Cain and Abel had been created by angels, Gnostics and the Sethians’ (40, 7, 5). Thus we can
the power above all powers, the Mother, gave birth infer that the book title Allogeneis refers to the
to Seth in order to destroy the angels. The Mother seven sons of Seth. Moreover, the Archontics also

--- Page 489 ---
1065 SETHIANS
spoke of other prophets, ie. Martiades and Mar- Zostrianus are names of heavenly messengers,
sianus (perhaps a Syriac name for Henoch, alluding members of the race of Seth. The literature of these
to Gen 5:24; cf. Tardieu [1992], 532-33, note 69), Roman Christians seems to focus on a kind of
who had been taken up into the heavens and had heretical “prophetology” (Tardieu, 1992).
descended after three days. Seth, the revealer and 1.7. Theodoret of Cyrus, Graecarum affectio-
Saviour who is protected by the good God, fights num curatio, |, 14, identified the Sethians with the
against the powers and principalities. » Ophites mentioned by Irenaeus of Lyon, Adver-
1.6. The Neoplatonist philosopher Porphyry sus Haereses, I, 30.
mentions in his Life of Plotinus 16 sectarian Chris- 1.8. In his Liber scholiorum (A.D. 791/2), when
tians, ‘men of the schools of Adelphius and Aquili- he is dealing with the sect of the so called > Audi-
nus, who possessed a great many treatises of ans, Theodore bar Konai quotes and refers to an
Alexander the Libyan and Philocomus and Demo- Apocalypse of Abraham, an Apocalypse of
stratus and Lydus and produced revelations by > Strangers and a Book of Strangers (Mimra XI, 63
Zoroaster and Zostrianos, and Nicotheos, and [CSCO 69, 319-320 / French translation: CSCO
Allogenes, and Messos, and other people of the 432, 239]). A quotation from the latter work
kind...’ (transl. A-H. Armstrong). According to (God is speaking to Eve: ‘Become pregnant by me
Porphyry, Plotinus’ pupil Amelius composed 40 in order to prevent the creators of Adam from
volumes against the book of Zostrianus, whereas approaching you’) can — with some textual varia-
Porphyry himself exposed the spuriousness of the tion — also be found in the reports that Agapius
alleged book of Zoroaster (for apocryphal “Zoro- (A.D. 942; Kitab al-“Unwan, PO 7, 562-563) and
astrian” literature in general, cf. Bidez-Cumont). It Gregor Bar Hebraeus (13th century; On the here-
has been proposed to identify the treatise Zostri- sies, PO XIII, 259-260) devote to the Audians. In
anos mentioned by Porphyry with the Nag Ham- Agapius and Bar Hebraeus the quotation is part of
madi treatise Zostrianos (NHC VIII, 1; for the a religious myth of which some further details are
name “Zostrianos”, cf. Arnobius, Adversus Gen- related (French translation by Puech [1936], 939-
tiles I, 52), a suggestion that seems to be confirmed 94of.): the Father of Life and the Mother of Life
by some agreements between the terminology of come together and produce many gods; the Father
NHC VIII, 1 and Plotinus, Enneads Il,9 and by of Life creates an angel who creates all the other
Tardieu’s brilliant discovery that part of this trea- angels. In defiance of the Adversary (i.e. the Devil),
tise, 1.e. NHC VII, 1, 64,13-66, 11 (66, 12-84, 22), the Father of Life creates Eve, who becomes preg-
has a verbatim parallel in a section (49, 9-50, 21) of nant by him and thus produces a race that multi-
Adversus Arium 1, a theological treatise of the plies. The human body is made of matter, the soul
4th century Roman Christian Marius Victorinus. derives from the substance of the Father of Life.
These parallel passages formulate both a negative The jealous Adversary manages to detach a particle
and an affirmative theology of the One. Tardieu from the Father of Life, to clothe it with a body and
(1996) argued that this parallelism can be send it into the world in order to call mankind to
explained by assuming a common, Middle Platon- worship the Adversary. The Father of Life gets
ist source (Numenius) for both Zostrianus and angry, and kills and crucifies Christ. In the end the
Adversus Arium. There is some scholarly contro- Father of Life, the Mother of Life, and the divine
versy about the date of Zostrianus (NHC VIII, r): realm produced by them will perish (!). In order to
some claim that the triad of existence, life and mind evaluate properly the information provided by
presupposes the metaphysics of Porphyry (Abra- Agapius and Bar Hebraeus, further research into
mowski, Majercik) and points to a revision of the the heresiology of these and other oriental authors
treatise after it had been criticised by both Amelius is needed. The idea that Eve is at the origin of a par-
and Porphyry. Other scholars feel confident in ticular divine race has clear parallels in other writ-
asserting a pre-Plotinian, Middle Platonist back- ings attributed to the Sethians. Puech suggested
ground for this triad and other “Platonist” features that books mentioned by Theodore are perhaps
of the writing (Tardieu). Tardieu has further sug- identical with the Apocalypse of Allogeneis referred
gested that the treatise Zostrianus explains or con- to by Porphyry (see above), and the Apocalypse of
tinues the treatise Zoroaster, just as the treatise Abraham and Allogeneis mentioned by Epiphanius
Messos (the son of Allogenes, cf. NHC XI, 3, 50, of Salamis (see above). According to Puech the
19; 68, 28; 69, 16) contains an interpretation of the schismatic church of the Audians which sprung up
treatise Allogenes. Nicotheos, who is also men- in the 4th century later developed into a heretical
tioned in the Bruce Codex (ed. Schmidt-Till, 342), Gnostic group.
may be another name for Enoch; Zoroaster and 1.9. Seth plays also an important role in >

--- Page 490 ---
1066
SETHIANS
Manichaeism: he belongs, together with Noah, writing as Sethian: 1. the self definition as pneu-
Abraham, Shem and Enoch, to the series of embod- matic seed of Seth; 2. Seth as the saviour of the race
iments of the divine Nous (Lieu, 23; Stroumsa, of Sethians; 3. a particular version of negative the-
145-167). The Cologne Mani Codex quotes an ology; 4. a specific philosophical terminology; 5.
Apocalypse ofSeth (pp. 50-51, ed. Koenen-Romer, the divine family triad of Father (Invisible Spirit),
32-35]|). Serapion of Thmuis designates a “Sitia- Mother (Barbelo), Son (Autogenes); 6. the aeon of
nus” as a heretical predecessor of Mani (Adversus Barbelo as consisting of Kalyptos, Protophanes
Manichaeos, Ill). and Autogenes; 7. the four light aeons of the Auto-
From our survey we can conclude that for genes (Armozel, Oriel, Daveithai, Eleleth); 8. the
Hippolytus, Refutatio, V, 19-22 and Epiphanius, three or four ministers of the four light aeons, e.g.
Panarion, 39, the distinguishing trait of the Sethi- Gamaliel, Gabriel, Samblo, Abrasax; 9. the Coptic
ans was their production and use of (pseudepi- name “Pigeradamas” for Adamas; 10. Yaldabaoth
graphic) religious literature. Neither heresiologist as the evil demiurge and enemy of the race of Seth;
seems to know anything about distinct Sethian r1. the division of salvation history into three peri-
ethics, group organization, liturgy or sacramental ods; 12. an ecstatic prayer; 13. the baptism of the
practice. Theodoret makes an heresiological in- Five Seals; 14. secondary Christianization (Turner,
ference when he connects Irenaeus’ Ophites with 2000). Not all of theses features are present in
the Sethians. Epiphanius, Panarion, 26 and 40, every text labelled as Sethian; according to Turner
identifies “Gnostics” and “Archontics” as produc- (136), Melchizedek (NHC IX, 1) is ‘farthest
ers of Sethian literature; we learn from Porphyry removed from the core interests of the Sethian
that Roman Gnostics around 250 produced group’.
Sethian treatises. Sethian books were also read by A closer look at this list reveals that three of the
the followers of > Mani. Later Syriac heresiology eleven writings selected from the Nag Hammadi
refers to the Audians as authors of Sethian books. Corpus can be labelled as Sethian pseudepigraphy
Hence we are faced with a problem: on the one in the sense that they are somehow attributed to
hand the heresiological tradition indicates that the Seth himself: the Gospel of the Egyptians pretends
production and use of certain books defines the to be written by Seth who placed it in the mountain
identity of the Sethians. On the other hand it sug- Charaxio; it will be revealed at the end of time
gests that the production of Sethian literature was (NHCIII, 2, 68), the Apocalypse of Adam pretends
not the prerogative of only one religious group. to bea revelation transmitted from Adam to his son
Seth (NHC V, 5, 64.85), and in the Three Steles of
2. A MODERN DEFINITION OF Seth Dositheos reports what he has read on three
SETHIANISM steles inscribed by Seth (NHC Vil, 5, 118). A fur-
Emulating the precedent of ancient heresiology, ther Nag Hammadi writing, the Second Treatise of
modern scholarship tried to identify a “Sethian” the Great Seth (NHC VII, 2), mentions Seth only in
type of gnosticism by demarcating a Sethian body the title and does not exhibit any of the features
of literature and inferring from it the existence of which according to Schenke and Turner allow a
Sethians As regards the Nag Hammadi Coptic writing to be labelled as “Sethian”.
library, Schenke proposed to label the following If we enquire about the role of Seth and the Sethi-
writings as “Sethian”: the Apocryphon of John ans in the Nag Hammadi texts of Schenke’s list, we
(NHC II, 1; Ill, 1; IV, 1), the Hypostasis of the find some variation: in the Apocryphon of John
Archons (II, 4), the Gospel ofthe Egyptians (III, 2; Seth is present on two levels: he is first mentioned
IV, 2); the Apocalypse of Adam (V, 5); the Three (NHC II, 1, 8-9) as the son of the perfect Man
Steles of Seth (VII, 5); Zostrianus (VIII, 1); (Pigera-Adamas) who in turn is the product of the
Melchizedek (IX, 1); the Thought of Norea (IX, 2); will of the invisible Spirit and of Autogenes (Christ/
Marsanes (X); Allogenes (XI, 3); the Trimorphic the sixth emanation from the Father). Whereas
Protennoia (XIII). To this catalogue he added the Pigera-Adamas is placed over the first of the four
Untitled Treatise of the Codex Brucianus, the illuminators Armozel, Oriel, Daveithai and Eleleth
teaching related by Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses, I, (coming from Christ, the indestructibility, through
29 and the doctrines described by Epiphanius of the Spirit), Seth is placed in the second light aeon
Salamis in sections 26, 39 and 40 of his Panarion Oriel. Seth’s seed (= Sethians, saints) have their
omnium haeresium (Schenke, 1981, 588-589). place in the fourth light aeon Deveithai. On a lower
This list is compiled on the basis of a catalogue of level, Yaldabaoth, the archon in the form of a lion-
14 distinctive features which allow us to label a faced serpent, is the product of Sophia’s abortive

--- Page 491 ---
1067 SETHIANS
attempt to conceive without the agreement of 3. ASSESSMENT OF THE EVIDENCE
the invisible spirit (NHC II, 1, 9-10). Yaldabaoth In order to warrant the inference from diverse
brings forth a creation of his own, thus unwittingly Sethian texts to a religious group or sect called
emulating the pleroma of the transcendent father. Sethians, one must first try to bring the texts we
Among his twelve aeons there are two called Cain either have or whose existence and contents we can
and Abel (NHC II, 1, 1off.). The creation of Adam surmise into some chronological order, sketch a
is a long and complicated process, it is Yaldabaoth connection between them and try to discern a
who, by blowing his spirit into Adam’s lifeless body development. In this way a reconstruction of the
(cf. Gen 2, 7), conveyed his mother’s power to him history of Sethian literature can be attempted. As a
(NHC II, 1, 19). When the powers realized this, second step one can try to view the history of
they cast Adam out into the lowest region of mat- Sethian literature as a history of “Sethianism” (as
ter (NHC II, 1, 20). Since the transcendent Father the religious ideology of a distinct group) or, sim-
pitied Adam, he sent him the luminous Epinoia ply, the Sethians. According to Turner, Sethianism
which helps, instructs and restores Adam during originally arose as a coming together of two groups
his stay in the region of matter. The chief archon that had sprung up in the rst century: on the one
Yaldabaoth wished to rob Adam of the luminous hand the “Barbeloites” who taught that baptismal
Epinoia, but he failed and produced only a likeness immersion (the “Five Seals”) gave access to a reve-
of her, that is Eve. But when Adam looked at Eve, lation of divine wisdom coming from Barbelo, the
the luminous Epinoia appeared in her and Adam First Thought of God. On the other hand the
pronounced Gen 2:23-24. Yaldabaoth, in a second “Sethites” who were ‘morally earnest persons’ and
attempt to catch the luminous Epinoia, seduced defined themselves as the race of Seth. The “Barbe-
Eve — but the Epinoia had already left her. Eve gave loites” first fused with Christian baptismal groups
birth to Eloim and Yave, two archons, the one with and then, in the early 2nd century, with the
a bear face, the other with a cat face, the one right- “Sethites”: the product of this fusion were Christ-
eous, the other unrighteous. Thus sexual desire ian Sethians. Towards the end of the 2nd century,
came into the world through Eve, her two bastard these Christian Sethians suffered more and more
sons rule over the order of birth and death. Their exclusion from the emerging Christian orthodoxy.
camouflage names are Cain and Abe!. Adam, how- In reaction to this process, Christian Sethianism
ever, having been awakened and having seen the redefined itself as Platonic Sethianism by shedding
luminous Epinoia, the likeness of his own fore- parts of its distinctive mythology. However, by the
knowledge, produced the likeness of the son of late 3rd century the Sethians were also attacked
man, that is Seth (Gen 5, 3 /NHCII, 1, 24). Seth is and rejected by the Neoplatonists [> Neoplaton-
the origin of a spiritual race, the dwelling place of ism] (Turner, 2000, 131-144).
the aeons. They drank from the water of oblivion Turner’s history of Sethianism as a movement is
and did not know their origin; it is they on whom a bold and ingenious sketch. It depends on his
the Spirit of Life will descend, rendering them per- reconstruction of the development of Sethian liter-
fect and imperishable (NHC II, 1, 25). In the ature. Turner tries to explain the ancient evidence
Hypostasis of the Archons Seth is mentioned as a for the production and use of Sethian literature in
replacement for Abel (NHC II, 4, 91; cf. Gen 4: different contexts by assuming a later fragmenta-
25). The Gospel of the Egyptians — like the Apoc- tion of an originally more unified movement. How-
ryphon of John — speaks of Autogenes and the four ever, it is doubtful whether this explanation gives
lights Harmozel, Oroiael, Davithe and Eleleth full weight to the evidence provided by the ancient
(NHC III, 2, 1-52). Seth, the son of the incorrupt- heresiologists. Some of the groups mentioned by
ible Adamas, puts his seed in the fourth aeon / the them seem to have produced or used other writings
third light, Davithe (NHC III, 2, 56). Seth’s seed, whose titles we sometimes know but which might
the unmovable race is preserved inspite of the per- not have been Sethians by any standards. We have
secutions it suffers from the powers and angels. The no indications that there was a canon of Sethian lit-
great Seth passes through three parousias (the erature in the same way as there were Jewish,
flood, the conflagration, the judgement of the pow- Christian or Manichaean canons.
ers; NHC III, 2, 63); in the last he puts on Jesus Much remains to be done before we can firmly
Christ ‘and through him... nailed the powers of locate Sethian literature in its contemporary con-
the thirteen aeons’ (NHC III, 2, 64). Melchizedek text. Modern scholarship has rightly emphasized
contains a reference to the children of Seth (NHC its indebtedness to both Judaism and Greek philos-
EXerayts): ophy. The complex mythology that deals with Seth

--- Page 492 ---
SETHIANS 1068
and Sethians has to be further explored, its roots in the Sethians and Marsanes”, in: J.D. Turner/R. Majer-
Jewish midrashim and apocrypha have to be deter- cik (eds.), Gnosticism and Later Platonism, 225-257
A.EJ. Klijn, Seth in Jewish, Christian and Gnostic Lit-
mined. The problem of the precise relation between
erature (Supplements to Novum Testamentum XLVI),
the Roman “Gnostics” and Plotinian and Porphyr- Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1977 @ S.N.C. Lieu, Manichaeism in
ian Platonism is still unsolved. It would also be the Later Roman Empire and Medieval China (Wis-
important to follow up a possible link to the Valen- senschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament
tinian school: some Valentinians designated the 63), Tiibingen: Mohr, 19927 @ R.A. Lipsius, Zur Quel-
pneumatic race as descendants of Seth (Clement of lenkritik des Epiphanios, Wien: W. Braumiiller, 1865
Alexandria, Excerpta ex Theodoto, 54). The rela- B. Layton, (ed.), The Rediscovery of Gnosticism. Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Gnosti-
tion between Sethian writings and Christian litera-
cism at Yale New Haven, Connecticut, March 28-31,
ture is equally unclear; perhaps the Sethian books 1978, Vol. 2: Sethian Gnosticism (Studies in the His-
can partly be read as an attempt to outflank and tory of Religions XLI), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1981 @
supersede mainstream catholic Christianity. A.H.B. Logan, Gnostic Truth and Christian Heresy: A
Bearing in mind these considerations it seems at Study in the History of Gnosticism, Edinburgh: T&T
present safer to assume that ‘Sethianism is... a Clark 1996 @ G. MacRae, “Seth in Gnostic Texts and
Traditions”, in: P.J. Achtermeier (ed.), Society of Bibli-convenient working designation for a tentatively
cal Literature 1977 Seminar Papers, Missoula/Mon-
defined network of mythological and theological
tana: Scholars Press, 1977, 17-24 @ R. Majercik, “The
relationships among certain sources, the nature of Existence-Life-Intellect Triad in Gnosticism and Neo-
whose social historical connections is still uncer- platonism”, Classical Quarterly 42 (1992), 475-488 @
tain’ (Williams, 13). B.A. Pearson, Gnosticism, Judaism, and Egyptian
Christianity (Studies in Antiquity and Christianity),
Lit.: L. Abramowski, “Nag Hammadi 8,1 ‘Zostria- Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1990 @ E. Peterson,
nus’, das Anonymum Brucianum, Plotin Enn. 2,9 “Sethiani”, in: Enciclopedia Cattolica XI (1953), 433-
(33)”, in: H.-D. Blume & FE. Mann (eds.), Platonismus 434 @ H.-Ch. Puech, “Fragments retrouvés de l’Apoc-
und Christentum, Festschrift fiir H. Dorrie (Jahrbuch alypse d’Allogéne”, in: Mélanges Franz Cumont Il,
fiir Antike und Christentum, Erganzungsband 1o), Brussels: Université Libre de Bruxelles, 1936, 93 5-962
Minster/W.: Aschendorffsche Verlagsbuchhandlung, @ idem, “Audianer”, in: Reallexikon ftir Antike und
1983, 1-10 @ idem, “Marius Victorinus, Porphyrius Christentum 1 (1950), 910-915 @ J.M. Robinson (ed.),
und die romischen Gnostiker”, Zeitschrift fiir die The Nag Hammadi Library in English, 2nd and 3rd
Neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 74 (1983), 108-128 edition, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1984/1988 # H.-M. Schenke,
W. Adler, “Materials relating to Seth in an Anonymous “Das sethianische System nach Nag-Hammadi-Hand-
Chronographer (‘Pseudo-Malalas’) and in the Chrono- schriften”, in: P. Nagel (ed.), Studia Coptica, Berlin:
graphy of George Syncellus”, in: P.J. Achtemeier (ed.), Akademie Verlag, 1974, 165-172 @ idem, “The phe-
Society of Biblical Literature 1977 Seminar Papers, nomenon and significance of Gnostic Sethianism”, in:
Missoula/Montana: Scholars Press, 1977, 13-15 @ B. Layton, The Rediscovery of Gnosticism, 588-612 #
A.H. Armstrong (trans.), Porphyry: On the Life of C. Schmidt, “Irenaeus und seine Quelie in adv. haer. I,
Plotinus and the Order of his Books (Loeb Classical 29”, in: A. Harnack, et alii, Philotesia: Paul Kleinert
Library 440), Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard University zum LXX. Geburtstag dargebracht, Berlin: Weidmann
Press, 1995 @ C. Barry, W.-P. Funk, P.-H. Poirier, J.D. 1907, 315-336 @ C. Scholten, “Set, Setiten, Set(h)ia-
Turner, Zostrien (NHC VIII,r) (Bibliothéque Copte de ner: Il. Set(h)ianer, II. Apokryphe Schriften”, in:
Nag Hammadi: Section “Textes” 24), Québec-Lou- Lexikon fiir Theologie und Kirche 9 (2000), 496-497
vain-Paris: Les Presses de I’Université Laval/Editions @ J.-M. Sevrin, Le dossier baptismal séthien: Etudes
Peeters, 2000 @ J. Bidez & FE. Cumont, Les mages hel- sur la sacramentaire gnostique (Bibliothéque Copte de
lénisés (2 vols.), Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1938 @ A. le Nag Hammadi, Section “Etudes”, 2), Quebec: Les
Boulluec, La notion d’hérésie dans la littérature Presses de l’Université Laval, 1986 @ G.G. Stroumsa,
Grecque (2 vols.), Paris: Etudes Augustiniennes, 1985 Another Seed: Studies in Gnostic Mythology (NHS
¢ L. Brisson, “Adelphius”, in: Dictionnaire des XXIV), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1984 # M. Tardieu, “Les
Philosophes Antiques 1 (1989), 53-54 # idem, “Aquili- livres mis sous le nom de Seth”, in: M. Krause (ed.),
nus”, in: idem I (1989), 321-322 # K. Corrigan, Gnosis and Gnosticism: Papers read at the Seventh
“Platonism and Gnosticism: The Anonymous Com- International Conference on Patristic Studies (Oxford
mentary on the Parmenides: Middle or Neoplatonic?”, September 8th-13th 1975), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1977,
in: J.D. Turner/R. Majercik (eds.), Gnosticism and 204-210 @ idem, “Epiphane contre les gnostiques”, in:
Later Platonism: Themes, Figures and Texts (Society of Tel Quel 88 (été 1981), 64-91 @ idem, “Les gnostiques
Biblical Literature Symposium Series No.12), Atlanta: dans la Vie de Plotin”, in: L. Brisson (ed.), Porphyre,
Society of Biblical Literature, 2000, 141-177 # J. Dum- La Vie de Plotin, I: Etudes d’introduction, texte grec
mer, “Die Angaben iiber die gnostische Literatur bei et traduc-tion francaise, commentaire, notes compleé-
Epiphanius, Pan.haer. 26”, Koptologische Studien mentaires, bibliographie (Histoire des doctrines de
in der DDR (= Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der l’antiqutié classique 16), Paris: Vrin, 1992, 503-563
Martin-Luther-Universitat Halle- Wittenberg |Sonder- idem, Recherches sur la formation de l’Apocalypse de
heft] (1965), 191-219) @ J.F. Finamore, “Iamblichus, Zostrien et les sources de Marius Victorinus (Res

--- Page 493 ---
1069 SIMON MAGUS
Orientales IX), Bures-sur-Yvette (diffusion: Louvain, his teachings is difficult to assess. After Acts, our
Peeters Press), 1996 # idem, “Un témoin gnostique main sources are Justin Martyr (ca. 155), Irenaeus
copte de la tradition du Pseudo-Andronicus de
of Lyons (ca. 180), Hippolytus (ca. 220), the apoc-
Rhodes”, in: Deuxiéme journée d’études coptes
ryphal Acts of Peter (2nd century) and the so-called
(Cahiers de la Bibliothéque Copte, 3), Louvain, 1986,
117-122 @ J.D. Turner, “Gnosticismand Platonism: Pseudo-Clementine Homilies and Recognitions
The Platonizing Sethian Texts from Nag Hammadi in (4th century). The main elements of the teachings
their Relation to Later Platonic Literature”, in: R.T. ascribed to Simon in these sources are the follow-
Wallis & J. Bregman (eds.), Neoplatonism and Gnosti- ing. He claimed to be a manifestation of the “Great
cism, Albany/N.Y.: State University of New York Press, Power”, i.e. the supreme god, and said that his
1992, 424-459 @ idem, “Sethian Gnosticism: A Liter-
companion, called Helena, a former prostitute,
ary History”, in: C.W. Hedrick & R. Hodgson (eds.),
was in fact his First Thought. The creators of the Nag Hammadi, Gnosticism and Early Christianity,
Peabody MA: Hendrickson Publishers, 1986, 55-86 world, which she herself had brought forth, had
idem, in: C. Barry et alii (eds.), Zostrien [NH VIII,r], imprisoned her in a female body and subjected her
131-144 @ idem, “Ritual in Gnosticism”, in: J.D. Turner/ to a long series of reincarnations until Simon finally
R. Majercik (eds.), Gnosticism and Later Platonism, found her in a brothel and rescued her. Because of
83-139 @ idem, “The Setting of the Platonizing Sethian this salvation, Simon became in the view of his
Treatises in Middle Platonism”, in: J.D. Turner/
opponents a Gnostic saviour and Helena the
R. Majercik (eds.), Gnosticism and Later Platonism,
prototype of the Gnostic believer. As could be 179-224 @ idem, “Time and History in Sethian Gnos-
ticism”, in: H.-G. Bethge, St. Emmel, K.L. King & expected, all kinds of magical tricks were ascribed
I. Schletterer (eds.), For the Children, Perfect Instruc- to him, especially in the legends which deal with
tion: Studies in Honor of Hans-Martin Schenke (Nag his confrontations with the apostle Peter. It is
Hammadi and Manichaean Studies, 54), Leiden, extremely difficult to determine which elements
Boston: E.J. Brill, 2002, 203-214 @ FE. Williams (trans.), belong to the earliest layers of the Simonian tradi-
The Panarion of Epiphanius of Salamis. Book I (Sects
tion and which are later developments. In the fol-
1-46), Leiden: E.J. Brill} 1987 # M.A. Williams,
Rethinking “Gnosticism”: An Argument for Disman- lowing, the main elements of the traditions listed
tling a Dubious Category, Princeton/N.J.: Princeton above are discussed in their chronological develop-
University Press, 1996 @ F. Wisse, “Stalking those elu- ment, preceded by an analysis of the New Testa-
sive Sethians”, in: B. Layton (ed.), The Rediscovery of ment data about Simon.
Gnosticism, 563-576.
2. THE BIBLICAL SIMON Macus
WINRICH A. LOHR
Literary criticism has made clear that Luke’s
report in Acts 8 is a combination of two sources,
Silvester, Bernard > Bernard Silvester reflected in Acts 8:9-13 and 8:14-24 respectively.
The first of these sources ascribed the mission in
Simon Magus, ca. 50 Samaria to the scattered ‘Hellenists’ (see 8:1 and 4)
and the second to the apostles in Jerusalem. The
1. INTRODUCTION 2. THE BIBLICAL SIMON information about Simon from the first source is,
Macus 3. SIMON MAGUS AS THE SUPREME historically, by far the most important. It related
Gop 4. HELENA AND THE DOCTRINE OF the conversion of a certain Simon, a magician, by
SALVATION 5. THE “GREAT REVELATION” the Christian missionary Philip. Before this event,
(APOPHASIS MEGALE) 6. CONCLUSION Simon had dazzled the city by his magical arts, and
his claim to be ‘someone great’ had been accepted
t. INTRODUCTION by ‘all of them, high and low’. They said (lit.): ‘This
Simon was a Samaritan magician who lived in one is the power of God which is called the great’
the first half of the rst century A.D. and is first men- (8:10). The scholarly debate about the meaning of
tioned in the biblical book of Acts (8:9-25). The this sentence has not yet come to an end, but the
early Christian anti-heretical writers considered following observations are accepted here as ascer-
him the founding father of > Gnosticism, the arch- tained: the addition ‘of God’ is typically Lukan
heretic, ‘from whom all heresies derived’ (Irenaeus, (comp. Luke 22:69 with Mark 15:62 and Matthew
Adversus haereses I, 23, 2). The various and some- 27:64) and the same holds for the expression
times contradictory traditions about his vicissi- ‘which is called’. Then the original confession of
tudes and teachings make him an elusive and Simon’s divine status said: ‘This one is the great
legendary figure. In the 2nd and 3rd centuries there Power’. There is a wealth of parallels which show
were Gnostics who called themselves Simonians that this corresponds either to a claim by Simon
but their relationship with the historical Simon and himself: ‘I am the Great Power’ or to a confession

--- Page 494 ---
SIMON MAGUS 1070
of the believing community: ‘You are the Great Hellenistic Greek inhabitants of Samaria, and not
Power’. As a designation of God, the term “the in particular among the Samaritans in the specific
Great Power” was well known in Jewish, Samari- ethnic and religious sense of the word. It seems
tan, Gnostic and non-Gnostic early Christian liter- most likely that the Simonians Justin met in Rome
ature. On the basis of the designation alone there is belonged to a syncretic religious community that
no reason to suppose that the early Simonians were had originated in Samaria and which might have
strongly influenced by Samaritan religious ideas or adopted some specific elements of the Samaritan
represented a group of pre-Christian Samaritan religion. One of these elements might be the desig-
Gnostics. The only certain fact seems to be that the nation “the Standing One”, a divine epithet, which
followers of Simon, and perhaps Simon himself, according to later traditions was applied to Simon
declared that he was a manifestation of the “Great (see below, sub 5). According to Justin, Simon was
Power”, the highest God himself. even honoured by the Roman Senate with a statue,
The second part of Luke’s story of Simon, Acts erected on an island in the Tiber, with the inscrip-
8:14-24, is generally thought to have no historical tion: ‘To Simon, the holy god’. In Apol. I, 56, 4,
value. One of its most conspicuous objectives is to Justin asks the Senate to destroy this statue. That
point out the difference between the miracles of such a statue had actually existed was proven in the
pagan magicians and those of Christian missionar- year 1574, when a column was found on Tiber
ies, since the latter are due to the gift of the Holy Island with an inscription of which the first words
Spirit. The source behind this story apparently did read: ‘Semoni Sanco Deo’. Semo Sancus was an old
not know that, according to another tradition, Italian-Roman deity that became to be identified
Simon was one of the new converts who received with the Greek Zeus Pistios. As will be shown
the Holy Spirit through the laying-on of hands by below, Simon’s followers identified Simon with
Peter and John. He is said to have tried to buy the Zeus, which makes it very probable that Justin
power of bestowing the Holy Spirit. Peter rebukes knew that the Simonians of Rome claimed that the
him: ‘May your money go with you to damnation, statue on Tiber Island in fact represented their
because you thought God’s gift was for sale!’ (ori- Simon-Zeus. They apparently interpreted ‘Semoni
gin of the term “simony”). The story ends with Sanco Deo’ as ‘Simoni Sancto Deo’. Irenaeus,
Simon’s request to Peter to pray for him ‘that none Adversus haereses, 1, 23, 2, repeats this story and
of the things you have spoken of may fall upon me’. says that Simon was glorified by many as a god. In
This scene, in which the Prince of the Apostles addition to this, he says that Simon taught that he
defeats the pagan magician, provided the pattern had appeared as Son among the Jews, had
for later legendary confrontations between Simon descended as Father in Samaria, and had come as
and Peter. Holy Spirit among the other nations. He was the
Supreme Power, the Father who is above every-
3. SIMON MAGUS AS THE SUPREME thing, and accepted to be called by every name
Gop people would like to call him. This means that
Justin Martyr, who also came from Samaria and the Simonians considered Simon a universal god,
whose report, in his Apology I, 26, may be inde- to whom the names of all known deities could
pendent of Acts 8:9ff., seems to have known a be applied, those of the Christian god included,
group of Simonians in Rome. He says that Simon as is shown by the trinitarian structure of his
came from the Samaritan city of Gitta and in the appearances.
time of the Emperor Claudius (41-54) ‘performed
mighty acts of magic’ in Rome and ‘was reputed 4. HELENA AND THE DOCTRINE OF
to be a god’. According to Justin, ‘almost every SALVATION
Samaritan, and even a few from other regions, wor- Another aspect of the Simonian traditions first
ship him and call him the First God’, which might mentioned by Justin is that the Simonians not only
be Justin’s own Greek interpretation of the term worshipped Simon as the First God but also said
“Great Power”. His choice of words shows that by that on his travels he was accompanied by Helena,
the term “Samaritan” Justin meant someone who a former prostitute, who was honoured as his First
came from the region of Samaria. In his Dialogue Thought. More information about Helena is given
with Trypho, 120, Justin speaks about ‘my people, by Irenaeus, Adversus haereses, 1, 23, 2, who prob-
i.e. the Samaritans’, who ‘err in being seduced by ably depends here on Justin’s lost Syntagma against
the magician Simon who lives in their nation’. This all Heresies. Simon is said to have bought Helena
seems to imply that Simon was especially success- in the city of Tyre, and to have called her his
ful among the people Justin himself came from, the ‘First Thought, the Mother of everything’. His

--- Page 495 ---
Io71 SIMON MAGUS
first thought had been to create the angels and mic drama of fall and salvation. However, in I, 23,
archangels, and, accordingly, she had abandoned 3, Irenaeus ascribes to Simon a full-fledged Gnostic
him and descended to the lower parts of the cos- doctrine of salvation. The Unknown Father had
mos, where she had brought forth the angels and come down in the person of Simon to save Helena
powers that were to create the world. But her off- and the human beings in general ‘through the
spring had imprisoned her, since they did not want knowledge of themselves’. He wanted to correct
to be held for someone else’s offspring. In order to what had gone wrong under the bad government of
prevent her from ascending to her Father, she had the angels. He appeared as a man, though he was
been maltreated by her children, who locked her up not a man, and he suffered in Judaea, though he did
in a female body and forced her to migrate from not really suffer, which implies that Simon
one body to another through the course of the cen- identified himself with Christ. Man is saved by
turies. The famous Helen of Troy had been one of Simon’s grace, not by righteous deeds, for deeds are
her incarnations and she had finished as a whore in not good by nature but by accident. There are
a brothel: she was the lost sheep of the parable strong indications that Irenaeus or his source has
(Luke 15:6). It seems certain that Helena is here a attributed here some specific ideas of Basilides and
symbol of the fallen soul, which makes her histori- the Carpocratians to Simon (Liidemann, 81-86), of
cal existence very doubtful. The identification with which we may be sure that they were not already
Helen of Troy is understandable since this famous part of the historical Simon’s teaching.
woman was considered adulterous and lascivious.
She is also a symbol of the fallen soul in the Trea- 5. THE “GREAT REVELATION”
tise on the Soul (NHC II, 136, 36). This text and (APOPHASIS MEGALE)
also another text of the Nag Hammadi Library, the In his Refutatio, VI, 19, Hippolytus mainly re-
Authoritative Teaching, clearly express the idea peats the information he found in Irenaeus, with
that the soul prostitutes itself in the body (NHC II, the addition of some allegorical interpretations of
127. 22-12 5,47 and. Vi, 23, 12-16; 23, 24-24, 22° the Homeric Helen of Troy. More important is
comp. 24, 7-8: ‘he puts her into the brothel’). The Hippolytus’ presentation, in VI, 9-18, of an alleged
figure of Helena is very complex and, therefore, writing of Simon himself, called the Great Revela-
difficult to interpret. The idea that she is the first tion (Apophasis Megalé). Literary analysis has
thought of the supreme god suggests a connection shown that the work Hippolytus had at his dis-
with the Greek goddess Athena, who was said to posal! was in fact a paraphrase or commentary, not
have sprung from the head of Zeus, which the the original Apophasis (Frickel). The paraphrase is
philosophers interpreted as the manifestation of a rather late Gnostic composition, possibly from
the thought and the ideas of the highest god (Liide- the beginning of the 3rd-century, characterized by
mann 54-56). Also in several Gnostic systems the a strong philosophical, especially Neo-Pythago-
first emanation of the unknowable god is called his rean, influence (Aland). The fundamental idea of
first thought (Ennoia). According to Irenaeus, Ad- the original Apophasis can be deduced from a few
versus haereses, 1, 23, 4, the Simonians possessed literary quotations recorded in the paraphrase. The
images of Zeus/Jupiter and Athena/Minerva, primeval Power, described as the ‘root of the uni-
which they venerated as Simon and Helena respec- verse’ or as fire, is in itself nothing, but potentially
tively. It has been suggested that these identi- it contains everything, being and non-being. The
fications might be traced back to a syncretistic Zeus universe gradually emanates from it; the visible
cult in rst century Samaria (Ludemann). There are, originates out of the invisible, but the latter
however, also many parallels between Helena- remains hidden in the former. The two worlds co-
Ennoia and the Jewish Sophia, i.e. personified exist peacefully, there is no opposition between a
divine Wisdom, as well as with several Near-East- pure divine world and a bad material world. In the
ern female deities (Ishthar, Isis) who in their turn paraphrase, this fundamental idea is interpreted in
have influenced the idea of Sophia (Fossum-Quis- a Gnostic sense. It is used to explain both the pres-
pel). The idea of the fall of a divine emanation into ence of a divine spark in man and its possible return
the world of matter and its salvation by a Saviour to its divine origin. As a result, the paraphrase neg-
is certainly not Greek but Gnostic. If it is true that lects the peaceful co-existence of the two worlds of
Irenaeus’ report in I, 23, 2, depends on Justin’s Syn- the original Apophasis and takes the usual negative
tagma, it seems certain that already before the mid- Gnostic view of the material world for granted. It
dle of the 2nd century the Simonians adhered to a remains unclear, however, whether the original
undoubtedly Gnostic myth, in which the highest Apophasis was a mystical philosophical writing
god and his first emanation were involved in a cos- with some Gnostic leanings or a distinct Gnostic

--- Page 496 ---
SIMON MAGUS 1072
composition. There is a general consensus that the adhered to a primitive Gnostic system, in which the
Apopbhasis was not a work by the historical Simon Highest God comes down to rescue his fallen
and also that its paraphrase in Hippolytus has female counterpart, thus prefiguring the salvation
nothing or very little to do with the doctrines of the of the individual believer. The creation of the world
Simonians as recorded by Justin and Irenaeus. The by maleficent angels may also have been part of
only element that seems to point to an authentic their ideas, which is the more likely if Irenaeus,
Simonian background is at least part of the expres- who is the first to mention this, at this point is
sion ‘He who stands (estos), took his stand (stas) dependent on Justin Martyr. There is no evidence,
and will stand (stésomenos)’. It is used for the however, that these ideas go back to the teaching of
primeval Power, which originally was in its unal- Simon Magus himself. If the information in Luke’s
terable state of being, then expressed itself in the Acts is to be trusted, he seems to have been a pagan
world of matter, and finally will return to its origi- miracle worker and a strong religious personality,
nal status, and as such prefigures the fate of the who proclaimed, or was by his followers pro-
Gnostic believer’s own self. According to Hippoly- claimed, to be a manifestation of the Great Power,
tus, Refutatio VI, 9, Simon identified himself with the supreme god. There is no indication that at that
Christ, who really is ‘the One who stands, took his time Ennoia/Helena was already connected with
stand and will stand’, which seems to suggest that Simon. That he was influenced by some typically
the Simonians described Simon in that way (similar Samaritan religious ideas or even can be taken as a
remarks in the Pseudo-Clementine Homilies, II, 22, pre-Christian Samaritan Gnostic, cannot be proven
3-4, may be dependent on Hippolytus). What we with any certainty. Simon remains a very elusive
certainly know is that the Simonians called Simon figure: ‘The quest for the historical Simon (and
“the Standing One” (ho hest6s), as is testified Helena!) is even less promising than the quest for
int. al. by the non-Gnostic writer, > Clement of the historical Jesus’ (Meeks).
Alexandria, Stromateis, II, 52, 2. As an indication
of the highest god or principle this term is found in A. Rousseau & L. Doutreleau (eds.), Irénée de Lyon:
Contre les Hérésies, Livre I, (SC 264), Paris: Les Edi-
Samaritan, Hellenistic Jewish and Greek philo-
tions du Cerf, 1979 (with French trans.); Eng. trans.
sophical and hermetic writings [> Hermetic Lite- after the German trans. by W. Foerster, in: idem (ed.),
rature]. It has been taken as proof of the Samaritan Gnosis: A Selection of Gnostic Texts, Eng. trans. edited
background of Simonian Gnosticism (Fossum), but by R.McL. Wilson, vol. 1, Oxford: Clarendon Press,
the evidence is far from compelling. The same 1972, 27-32 @ M. Marcovich (ed.), Hippolytus: Refu-
holds for the connection between Dositheus, a tatio omnium haeresium (Patristische Texte und Stu-
dien, 25), Berlin/New York: De Gruyter, 1986; Eng.
heretic in Samaritan sources, and Simon. According
trans.: Foerster, Gnosis, vol. 1, 251-260 (Megalé Apo-
to the 4th-century Pseudo-Clementine Homilies. II,
phasis) # R.A. Lipsius (ed.), Actus Petri cum Simone,
24, Dositheus succeeded John the Baptist as leader in: R.A. Lipsius & M. Bonnet (eds.), Acta Apostolo-
of the sect, but he was outrivalled by Simon, rum Apocrypha, vol. 1, Leipzig: Herman Mendel-
who then came to be worshipped as the Standing sohn, 1891 (reprinted Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche
One in his place. The Pseudo-Clementines are Buchgesellschaft, 1959), 45-103; German. trans. by
based on an earlier writing (“Grundschrift”) which W. Schneemelcher, in: W. Schneeemelcher (ed.), Neu-
testamentliche Apokryphen in deutscher Ubersetzung,was strongly influenced by Jewish-Christian ideas.
vol. 2, 6th ed., Tibingen: Mohr, 1997 (Eng. trans. of
The magician Simon figures in them as the oppo-
the 4th ed., by R. McL. Wilson (ed.), New Testament
nent of the apostle Peter, but there is a broad schol- Apocrypha, vol. 2, Cambridge/Louisville, Kent.: Clarke
arly consensus that behind Simon the real targets & Co./Westminster-John Knox Press, 1992) @ B. Rehm
are the apostle Paul and (also or exclusively) > (ed.), Die Pseudoklementinen, 3 vols., vol. 1 (Homi-
Marcion. lien), 3rd rev. ed., vol. II (Rekognitionen in Rufins
Ubersetzung), 2nd rev. ed., vol. III (Konkordanz), 2
vols., Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1992, 1994, 1986-
6. CONCLUSION
1989, resp.; Eng. trans. by Th. Smith in: ANCL,
Already before the middle of the 2nd century
vols. 3 (Recognitions) and 17 (Homilies), Edinburgh:
there was a Simonian sect whose members wor- T&T Clark, 1867 and 1870, resp. (both reprinted in
shipped Simon as the manifestation of the First ANF, vol. 8, Edinburgh/Grand Rapids: T&T Clark/
God and Ennoia/Helena as his First Thought. The W.B. Eerdmans, 1995).
association of Ennoia with Helena, who was a sym-
Lit.: B. Aland, “Gnosis und Philosophie”, in: G. Widen-
bol of the fallen soul, makes it virtually certain that
gren (ed.), Proceedings of the International Collo-
these Simonians were Gnostics. If it is true, as
quium on Gnosticism, Stockholm August 20-25, 1973,
accepted by many scholars, that the Jewish Sophia Stockholm: Almgvist & Wiksell, 1977, 34-73 @ S. Arai,
is hiding behind Helena, the Simonians may have “Simonianische Gnosis und die Exegese iiber die

--- Page 497 ---
1073 SINCERUS RENATUS
Seele”, in: M. Krause (ed.), Gnosis and Gnosticism: appeared in Leipzig and Breslau as Sinceri Renati
Papers read at the Seventh International Conference on sdmtliche philosophisch- und chymische Schrifften
Patristic Studies (Oxford, September 8th-13th 1975),
(Sincerus Renatus’s Complete Philosophical and
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1977, 185-203 @ K. Beyschlag,
Chemical Writings).
Simon Magus und die christliche Gnosis (Wissen-
schaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament, The complete titles of these texts indicate the
16), Tubingen: J.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 1974 ¢ twin foci of their content: > alchemy, and the Rosi-
W. Foerster, “Die ‘ersten Gnostiker’ Simon und crucians [> Rosicrucianism]. Samuel Richter
Menander”, in: U. Bianchi (ed.), The Origins of Gnos- belongs within the tradition of Christian Hermeti-
ticism: Colloquium of Messina, 13-18 April 1966. cism [> Hermeticism and Hermetic Societies]
Texts and Discussions (Studies in the History of Reli-
which included > Paracelsus, > Weigel, > Jakob
gions, 12), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1967, 190-196 @ J.E. Fos-
Boehme, Schwenckfeld, and the pietists [> sum, The Name of God and the Angel of the Lord:
Samaritan and Jewish Concepts of Intermediation and Pietism]. He states that there can be no philosophy
the Origin of Gnosticism (Wissenschaftliche Unter- without theology, and vice versa, since God and
suchungen zum Neuen Testament, 30), Tiibingen: Nature cannot be separated. His Theo-philosophia
J.C.B. Mohr (Pauls Siebeck), 1985 @ J. Fossum resides in the unity of faith and knowledge.
& G. Quispel, “Helena I (simonianisch)”, RAC 14 According to Richter, the whole universe has
(1988), 338-355 @ J. Frickel, Die “Apophasis Megale”
arisen out of God’s desire to manifest himself. Fol-
in Hippolyts Refutatio (VI, 9-18): Eine Paraphrase zur
lowing the example of Boehme, Richter thought Apophasis Simons (Orientalia Christiana Analecta,
182), Rome: Pontif. Institutum Orientalium Studio- that God had first been Ungrund, the bottomless
rum, 1968 @ H.G. Kippenberg, Garizim und Synagoge: Divinity. Then, in order to know himself, God had
Traditionsgeschichtliche Untersuchungen zur samari- to manifest in duality, divide himself, be born from
tanischen Religion der aramdischen Periode (Religions- himself, and so become Nature (the Latin word
geschichtliche Versuche und Vorarbeiten, 30), Berlin/ natura is derived from the verb nascor, which
New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1971 @ G. Ludemann,
means “to be born”). Thus God initially divided
Untersuchungen zur simonianischen Gnosis (GO6t-
into two principles: dark fire and luminous fire, or tinger Theologische Arbeiten, I), Gottingen: Vanden-
hoeck & Ruprecht, 1975 # W.A. Meeks, “Simon wrath and love. The fire is God the Father; the light
Magus in Recent Research”, Religious Studies Revue 3 is the Son; and the Holy Spirit manifests the eternal
(1977), 137-142 @ K. Rudolph, “Simon — Magus oder Wisdom. As in Boehme, this creation was realized
Gnosticus? Zur Stand der Debatte”, Theologische in seven stages. It was afterwards that Lucifer
Rundschau 42 (1977), 279-359. appeared, who by his luminous hyper-concentra-
tion destroyed the equilibrium between light and
ROELOF VAN DEN BROEK darkness. He was thus the first creature to oppose
his own will to that of his Creator, and to introduce
Sincerus Renatus (ps. of Samuel Richter), evil into the world.
* end of 17th century Reichau, + year God was thereupon constrained to make a new
and place unknown creation, manifested by the divine Word: “Let there
be light”, while Lucifer was thrown by God into
A native of Reichau, a village of the duchy of the realm of death. As for man, he was originally
Brieg in Silesia, Richter is said to have worked as a the perfect creature in God’s own likeness. That is
tutor for noble families and studied medicine, then why he was then both male and female, able to
theology, at Halle, before becoming a Lutheran reproduce through > magic. But when Adam felt
pastor at Hartmannsdorf, near Landeshut (also in himself to be alone, he lost the magic force of the
Silesia). His first publication, dated 1709, pub- divine fiat. God then created a companion for him
lished 1710, and presented by the author as an and fed them both on the manna of Paradise, until
ancient manuscript transmitted by initiates, was Lucifer’s renewed intervention with the apple pre-
called Die Warhaffte und vollkommene Bereitung cipitated both Adam’s fall and the corruption of the
Des Philosophischen Steins (The True and Perfect new creation.
Preparation of the Philosophic Stone). Two further But before this occurred, according to Sincerus
works of Sincerus Renatus appeared in Breslau in Renatus, God had introduced the ‘name of Jesus
1711, entitled Theo-philosophia theoretico-prac- into the seed of the woman’, in such a way that
tica (Theoretical-practical Theo-philosophy) and Jesus is invisibly inscribed in the nature of each
Goldene Quelle der Natur und Kunst (Golden human being. He is ‘the true philosophers’ stone,
Fountain of Nature and Art). The contents of these the tincture of our inner being’, capable of purify-
three works found such a reception among readers ing and redeeming him. Samuel Richter states that
that a complete reprint was necessary in 1741. This God has also given to outer and corrupted nature

--- Page 498 ---
SINCERUS RENATUS 1074
an earthly Savior, a Lapis philosophorum, which philosophia theoretico-practica/oder der wahre Grund
every man is capable of preparing as soon as Christ Géttlicher und natiirlicher Erkdnntniss/dadurch beyde
Tincturen/die himlische und Irrdische / kinnen erhal-
has purified his soul and regenerated him.
ten werden: Zugleich ein Grund aller Particularien,
It is evident how far removed this pastor, a disci- und Fundament der wahren Medicin. Dabey gezeiget
ple of > Hermes Trismegistus and ~ Ramon Llull, wird, wie in der Gussern Natur durch alle Regna zu ver-
was from Lutheran orthodoxy; but in the redemp- fabren/damit ein jedes Corpus wieder in seinen reinen
tion of nature, in this Theo-Philosophia which was Paradiesischen Stand gebracht werden kinne durch die
in fact a philosophy ofdivine immanence, one finds Chymie oder Scheidekunst; Nebst einer Erlauterung
des Operis maximi und Beyftigung versprochenerideas of Heinrich Khunrath and certain aspects
Experimente . . ., Breslau: Fellgiebels, 1711 @ Goldene
of > Johann Valentin Andreae’s novel The Chemi-
Quelle der Natur und Kunst, bestehende in lauter
cal Wedding of Christian Rosencreutz. However, wabhrhafften und durch die Experienz bestatigten
Samuel Richter modified the name of the original Experimentis ..., n.p. [Breslau]: Fellgiebels, 1711 @
Rose-Cross by instituting a “Gold- und Rosen- These three works were reprinted in one volume: Sin-
Creutz” (Gold and Rose Cross), at the same time ceri Renati samtliche Philosophisch- und Chymische
supposing that the last representatives of the Rosi- Schriften, Leipzig, Breslau: Michael Huber, 1741.
crucian brotherhood had left Europe and settled in
Lit.: Arnold Marx, Die Gold- und Rosenkreuzer: Ein
India to found a new community there, whose
Mysterienbund des ausgehenden 18ten Jahrhunderts,
statutes he reproduced [> Rosicrucianism II]. Zeulenrode/Leipzig: Das Freimaurer Museum, 1930,
It is precisely in the last chapter of his vast work 13-18 @ John Ferguson, Bibliotheca Chemica, vol. 2,
that one finds a collection of fifty-two practical London: Derek Verschoyle, 1954, 275-276 # Rolf
rules to be followed by the members of the Brother- Christian Zimmermann, Das Weltbild des jungen
hood of the Gold and Rose Cross after their pro- Goethe, 2 vols., Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 1969, 1979 (1:
fession of faith. Among other things, one learns 128-134; 316-3243 2: 331-352) @ Will-Erich Peuckert,
Das Rosenkreutz, Berlin, 1973, 339-350 @ Karl R.H.
that after their admission they must change their
Frick, Die Erleuchteten: Gnostisch-theosophische und
name and become rejuvenated thanks to the grace alchemistisch-rosenkreuzerische Geheimgesellschaften
of the philosophers’ stone; that their Christian alle- bis zum Ende des 18. Jahrhunderts, Graz: Akademi-
giance, whether Protestant or Catholic, must not sche Druck- und Verlagsanstalt, 1973, 303-308 ¢@
be revealed; that they are not permitted to marry, Christopher McIntosh, The Rose Cross and the Age of
but if need be may satisfy their desires with a Reason: Eighteenth Century Rosicrucianism in Central
Europe and its Relationship to the Enlightenment,woman; that they must convoke at Pentecost; that
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1992, 30-33, 48, 50, I5 1-152.
it is absolutely forbidden to them to reveal the
secrets of the Art that has been communicated to
ROLAND EDIGHOFFER
them; and lastly that their Imperator must change
his name and his residence every ten years.
Soules, Georges > Abeilio, Raymond Samuel Richter’s thought carried on in the so-
called “enlightened” 18th century the convictions
of alchemical theorists such as Heinrich Khunrath Spiritualism
and > Gérard Dorn, whose ideas had influenced
the first Rosicrucians. Moreover, Rolf Christian 1. TERMINOLOGY 2. ORIGINS 3. THE
Zimmermann has amply demonstrated how SPREAD AND DEVELOPMENT OF
strongly the Hermeticism of Sincerus Renatus ori- SPIRITUALISM 4. REFORMISM AND
ented what he calls the “private religion” of the PROGRESSIVISM 5. CRISIS AND
young > Goethe. Finally, the Golden and Rose TRANSFORMATION 6. SPIRITUALISM IN
Cross launched by Samuel Richter had an impor- ENGLAND 7. SPIRITUALISM OUTSIDE
tant influence in the circles of > Freemasonry, so ENGLISH-SPEAKING COUNTRIES
that one may say that he has continually been rena-
tus — reborn. 1. TERMINOLOGY
In its most basic form, Spiritualism is simply the
Die Wahrhaffte und vollkommene Bereitung Des Phi- belief that living men can and do hold intercourse,
losophischen Steins/Der Briiderschafft aus dem Orden usually through an intermediary, with “spirits” of
Des Giilden- und Rosen-Creutzes/Darinne die Materie
the dead. It is thus both a recurring possibility of
zu diesem GeheimnifS mit seinem Nahmen genennet/
human experience in all ages and a specific, histor- auch die Bereitung von Anfang bif. zum Ende mit allen
Hand-Griffen gezeiget ist/Dabey angehdnget die Gesetz ically defined phenomenon with roots in mid-r9th
oder Regeln/welche die gedachte Briiderschafft unter century America. The first definition is so sweeping
sich hdlt..., Breslau: Fellgiebels, 1710 # Theo- as to be of little use, encompassing as it does every-

--- Page 499 ---
1075 SPIRITUALISM
thing from the trance voyages of shamans to King clapped her hands and her pattern was imitated.
Saul’s recourse to the Witch of Endor, and only the Margaretta then called out, ‘Now do just as I do’,
historical movement will be discussed here. and clapped her hands while counting out num-
bers. The knocks followed her lead. The children’s
2. ORIGINS mother then asked if the source of the noise was a
The middle 50 years of the roth century in Amer- spirit, and told it to respond with one knock for
ica were a time of unprecedented religious and ‘no’ and two knocks for ‘yes’, and heard two
social unrest. Upstate New York, which was to resounding knocks — Yes! Communication had
witness the birth of Spiritualism in 1848 as it had been established.
already seen the birth of Mormonism, Adventism, The family’s neighbors were called in the next
Millerism and other new cults, was the heart of the day, to hear the knocking and ask questions oftheir
“ burned over district” where religious revivals had own. It gradually came to light that the spirit com-
flourished and then died, leaving in their wake a municating was that of a peddler, slain in the house
yearning to find experience, conviction and novelty and buried in the basement — an assertion later but-
and establishing a socially accepted framework for tressed by the father with the production of a few
expressing them when found. There was wide- bones and teeth supposedly found in the basement.
spread dissatisfaction with the established, old-line Seeking advice and help, the family visited Isaac
Evangelical churches and their exposition of the Post (1798-1872), a Quaker and devoted aboli-
Bible, and in New York and the entire Northeast of tionist, who devised the long-standard method of
the United States generally those soon to embrace communicating with rapping spirits by assigning
Spiritualism in droves had turned to the more each letter of the alphabet a certain number of
socially conscious Universalism which denied all knocks.
authority but that of the individual’s own ex- Among the instructions thus received from the
perience (“Individual Sovereignty”), rejected the spirit, was the command to give public demonstra-
uniqueness of Biblical revelation, the Church and tions of the girls’ abilities, and the first was held at
the role of Christ and rejoiced in the fact that death Corinthian Hall in Rochester on November 14,
no longer promised judgment and threatened hell 1848. Four hundred attended, paying 25 cents each
but instead was but the gateway to continued life. for the privilege, and, despite some criticism that
This northeastern Universalist background of its the girls were causing the rapping themselves, the
first adherents was the predominant force in shap- audience largely gave credence to the spirits’ mes-
ing early Spiritualism, and with rare exceptions the sages of consolation to the bereaved and the conti-
new movement made few inroads in the more evan- nuity of life after death. In 1850 the girls visited
gelical southern states or among Catholics in New York City, where they gave three seances a
America. day (at $1.50 per person) and managed in the
Although the American Shakers had been com- process to convert Horace Greeley, the editor of the
muning with the spirits of American Indians since Tribune, to the new cause. By 1852 they had
the early 1840s (and later asserted their priority in removed to New York City to conduct seances, but
founding Spiritualism), the origins of Spiritualism by that time the sisters, who had never in any sense
lie in the experiences in 1848 of the three daughters been the leaders of the new movement or believed
of John D. Fox. Fox, a Methodist, had moved to a to be in any way more holy, highly evolved or “spir-
farm near Hydesville, New York, in the vicinity of itual” than those attending their seances, had
Rochester in late 1847. With him were his wife and become peripheral, though revered, figures in the
two unmarried daughters, Margaretta (7.10.1833- movement. The sisters’ subsequent history is
8.3.1893) and Catherine (Kate) (27.3.1837- marked by strife, alcoholism and confessions of
2.7.1892). The girls’ older married sister, Ann fraud. As Spiritualism moved away from simple
Leah Underhill (1814-4.11.1890), lived nearby in rappings, the girls tried other forms of mediumship
Rochester. The family regularly heard mysterious and Kate in later years even touted her infant son as
knockings about the house without being able to a writing medium, but despite their efforts they
ascertain the cause. The house was small and sin- never recaptured the public acclaim of their youth.
gle-storied, and the family slept together in a loft
under the pitched roof. It was there on the night 3. THE SPREAD AND DEVELOPMENT
of March 31, 1848 as the family prepared for bed OF SPIRITUALISM
that Margaretta and Kate responded to the knock- The new movement spread immediately and
ings and precipitated Spiritualism. While the knock- widely. By the end of 1849, it was the subject of
ings were occurring, Kate snapped her fingers or universal discussion, and seances were being held

--- Page 500 ---
SPIRITUALISM 1076
throughout the Northeast and as far west as Ohio. spirits. To their audiences, they were largely undis-
New mediums (as those with the ability to commu- tinguishable from stage magicians, and indeed the
nicate with the spirits were called) appeared every- connection between stage magic and prestidigita-
where in the Northeast, usually young women who tion and this development of Spiritualism is very
developed the talent spontaneously after attending strong, with several of its practitioners having a
one of the Fox sisters’ seances or simply after hear- foot in both camps. The Davenport Brothers, Ira
ing of them. New methods also began almost Erastus (1839-1911) and William Henry (1841-
immediately to be developed to facilitate the spir- 1877) are a good example. Beginning in the 1850s,
its’ communication — and to heighten the mystery they traveled the United States and Europe with
and conviction of the seances. their wonderful show, challenging the audience in
Circles for the investigation of the new phenom- each place to invent better ways to tie them to pre-
ena appeared before 1850 in Auburn, Boston and vent cheating. While the brothers were bound in
Stratford (Connecticut), and an informal ritual their special cabinet the spirits would speak in their
quickly began to emerge for private seances, in- own voices and play instruments to entertain the
volving the preparatory singing of church hymns, audience. It is no accident that in 1910 Ira Daven-
the dimming of the seance room lights and the port, in his old age, recognized his kinship with
holding of hands around a table. By 1855 the Harry Houdini. Another example is Annie Eva Fay,
number of spiritualists in the United States was an American in London in the mid-1870s, who first
estimated to be between one and eleven million tried to promote abilities very similar to those of
people - in a country of only 28 million. These the Davenports as stage magic, and then, achieving
numbers, and all of the other frequently cited mem- no success, turned her abilities to mediumship.
bership estimates from the rest of the century, are The pinnacle of this phenomenal side of Spiritu-
unreliable, but it cannot be doubted that the num- alism was materialization. By the early 1870s,
ber of people who believed in the new phenomena mediums were able regularly to produce the physi-
and occasionally attended a seance was very large. cal appearance of the spirits, usually as faces seen
The high point of enthusiasm in America was prob- through apertures in the medium’s cabinet, though
ably the mid-1850s. The American Civil War occasionally as full, three-dimensional material-
(1861-1865) and the beginning of the revelations ized bodies that could wander among and touch
of bogus and fraudulent mediums at about the the attendees at seances. Notable in this regard was
same time put an end to the rapid growth of the the English medium Florence Cook (1856-1904)
movement, and the last quarter of the century saw whose spirit Katie King enthralled Sir William
the gradual diminishing of interest in Spiritualism Crookes. In America, the Eddy Brothers, William
coupled with an increasing recourse on the part of (1838-1932) and Horatio (1842-1922), produced
mediums to theatricality. a host of materialized spirits at their house in
Almost immediately Spiritualism began to turn Vermont.
to ever more phenomenal, theatrical methods and From some early spiritualists’ point of view, the
demonstrations of the spirits’ power. First came increasing involvement of the spirits with the mate-
automatic writing, in which the entranced me- rial world was simply a demonstration that the
dium’s hand was taken over to write the spirits’ spirits were learning how to interact with matter.
words, then light trance, in which the medium was From a more cynical point of view, however, the
inspired to speak the thoughts of the spirit, and full tendency toward showmanship might more readily
trance, in which the unconscious medium voiced be explained by the competition of mediums for
the words of the spirit. Soon there were painting jaded audiences, a competition that must not be
mediums, whose organisms were used by the spir- ignored in assessing the movement. Increasingly
its to draw scenes from the afterlife or of departed lost sight of in all this flourishing of the marvelous
friends; slate readers, who could read the messages was any connection with the spirits’ original mes-
scrawled by the spirits between bound slates; and sages, which tended to take second place to the test
musical mediums, in whose presence musical mediums’ showmanship. Some, such as > A.J.
instruments flew around the darkened rooms and Davis, denounced these developments as unwhole-
played simple tunes. Throughout the 1850s tables some and fraudulent, while others, such as D.D.
and furniture shook and turned of their own Home, pointed out the dangers of entrusting the
accord and rapped out the spirits’ messages. prosperity of the new movement to the honesty of
By the mid-1850s a class of professionals had promoters and showmen. The debate continued
arisen, called “test mediums”, who took the stage until the end of the century in America, with the
at public demonstrations to show the power of the leading spiritualist journal, The Banner of Light

--- Page 501 ---
1077 SPIRITUALISM
of Boston, crediting each phenomenal claim and broad outline as their version of cosmology and
ignoring the increasing evidence of fraud, while its philosophy.
competitor, The Religio-Philosophical Journal of Davis was properly a clairvoyant seer, rather
Chicago, took the opposite tack and denounced than a spiritualist, and although it was his Harmo-
phenomenalism and publicized every occurrence of nial Philosophy that American Spiritualism com-
fraud. By 1900, the massive evidence of deception monly took up as the filter through which to view
convinced even the Banner, and organized Spiritu- its phenomena, his visions antedate Spiritualism
alism began to distance itself from recourse to the and properly stand independent of it — a fact that
marvelous as proof of its message — although fraud- required Davis in later years, especially in the
ulent phenomenal Spiritualism still existed suffi- debates in the 1870s over the value of marvelous
ciently in the 1920s for Harry Houdini to crusade phenomena and the relative merits of Spiritualism
against it. and occultism [> occult / occultism], to explicitly
One should note in the above description of early avow that he believed in ghosts and was himself a
Spiritualism the limited role assigned to the medium. He saw the cosmos as a series of succes-
medium and the simplicity of the spirits’ message. sive, concentric universes, thrown off from the pri-
The medium was the necessary condition to the mordial vast globe of divine central fire. God was
appearance of the spirits — the wire, as it were, of thus immanent in man himself and in nature, and
the spiritual telegraph (as the new phenomenon man at death began his progress through ever
was dubbed), bridging the two worlds — but no higher and more refined spheres of the divine.
more than that. Mediumship required no special The first publication of his teachings, a pamphlet
spiritual talents or holiness, conferred no authority, (deliberately never reprinted) entitled by Rev.
and was a gift that left its possessor spiritually Smith, the transcriber of Davis’s trance utterances,
unchanged. It was only gradually that individual Lectures on Clairmativeness (New York 1845),
mediums, such as ~ Emma Hardinge Britten was still decidedly Christian in tone. “Clairma-
(1823-1899) and Cora Linn Victoria Scott (later tiveness” was the neologism used to describe the
the Rev. Cora Richmond, 1840-1923), imposed heightened state of clairvoyance in which Davis
their personalities on the movement and took lead- experienced his visions. By 1847, however, when
ing roles in guiding and developing it. The original the first major compilation of his revelations was
spirit message delivered by the mediums was sim- published as The Principles of Nature, he had
ply that the human individuality survived death become increasingly opposed to the Bible and to
and could communicate from the afterlife. Immor- Christianity, rejecting the unique place of Jesus
tality should have been a commonplace belief in Christ and discarding the idea of the resurrection of
Christian America, but the spirits supplied proof to the dead and other Christian doctrines. Davis went
a skeptical and doubting world with their won- on to write voluminously of his visionary experi-
drous rappings. ences and medical discoveries. Though he survived
Lacking in the simple message of Spiritualism in until 1910, his role in Spiritualism was finished by
the early days was a coherent philosophy distin- the early 1870s when he attacked the errors of phe-
guished from that of non-spiritualists. In the truest nomenal Spiritualism.
Protestant spirit, each man was his own interpreter.
Each convert brought to the new movement his or 4. REFORMISM AND PROGRESSIVISM
her own beliefs and easily combined them with the Despite its general adoption of Davis’s philoso-
fundamental tenets of survival and communica- phy, American Spiritualism in its first 25 years of
tion, although the teachings of + Swedenborg and existence was extremely limited in its cast of char-
the Mesmerists [> Animal Magnetism] most read- acters, its goals, and its view of the nature and
ily and commonly were called upon to meet the potentialities of man. Almost without exception,
needs of the new movement. La Roy Sunderland the only entities who appeared at seances (or
(1802-1885), for example, who founded the first indeed who were thought to exist in the spiritual-
truly spiritualist journal —- The Spiritual Philoso- ists’ universe) were spirits of dead humans, and
pher in Boston in July 1850 — explained the phe- fairly recently dead humans, at that. The spirits of
nomena in light of his own predilection for American revolutionary heroes such as Tom Paine,
phreno-magnetism, calling the result “Pathetism”, Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson, along
just as the Rev. Thomas Lake Harris (1823-1906) with the spirits of suitably progressive American
turned to the teachings of Swedenborg. It remained Indians, appeared most commonly at seances,
for Andrew Jackson Davis to craft what, lacking a joined occasionally after the Indian Mutiny of 1857
better alternative, the spiritualists adopted in by the unrepentant spirit of Nana Sahib. Surprisingly,

--- Page 502 ---
SPIRITUALISM 1078
non-human spirits such as angels played little role rejected as rank superstition the accouterments of
at seances; nor was there room in the worldview of ancient ~> magic and mystery, and denounced as
the movement for the appearance of spirits of living undemocratic all thought of spiritual elites, initia-
men or of the great spiritual teachers (prophets, tion and secret societies.
masters, mahatmas, adepts and the like) of the past. Finally, early Spiritualism was unsatisfactory
All of this is understandable in the light of the from a personal point of view because it was first
fact that the understood purpose of early Spiritual- and foremost an indirect, secondhand experience.
ism was simply to convince of immortality, noth- The medium, herself frequently unconscious and in
ing more. The goal was not personal fulfillment, trance, mouthed the messages of the spirits to the
development, perfection, individualization, psychic faithful, who received them passively, in their nor-
powers or vision in this life. Individual progress mal consciousness, in exactly the same way as they
might come in the next life, since it was obvious might have received ideas from reading or from
that the spirits of the dead were more evolved and attending a sermon. The difference lay only in
better informed than the spiritualists who attended the special conviction imparted by the wondrous
seances, but this progress was thought to be the methods the spirits chose to use in communicating,
product of good living and morality, rather than and these were subject to challenge and doubt.
the result of initiatic, occult or magical effort
directed toward that goal. The goal of the early 5. CRISIS AND TRANSFORMATION
spiritualists, once convinced of their own survival Spiritualism had a brief resurgence in America
and immortality, was profoundly this-worldly: around the end of the Civil War in 1865, perhaps
social progress and reform here and now. An arti- the consequence of bereaved relatives seeking con-
cle in the Religio-PhilosophicalJournal for Bastille solation from their sons and fathers dead in the war,
Day 1866 made the point explicitly: ‘From the ear- but by the early 1870s the movement had fallen on
liest announcement of modern Spiritualism, it has hard times. One after another, spiritualist journals
been heralded by its advocates both public and pri- ceased publication, and the reports of seances and
vate as a reform movement. The “Fatherhood of traveling mediums in the journals grew fewer. It was
God and the Brotherhood of Man”, “Free Speech”, precisely at this low point that Spiritualism experi-
“Free Press”, and Equal Rights under the law, enced a profound crisis that was, in the end, to
whether the civil or higher law . . .’. All spiritualists transform it beyond the recognition of its earliest
were thus reformers, and, conversely, almost all of followers. The transformation is associated with the
the mid-century reformers (whether devotees of names of > Paschal Beverly Randolph, Emma Har-
woman’s rights, abolition, prohibition, economic dinge (Britten), > H.P. Blavatsky and > H.S. Olcott.
reform, or food, health and dress fads) dabbled, at Randolph (1825-1875), was a black American
least, in Spiritualism and found support among the visionary, and his visions first led him into Spiritu-
spirits for their views. alism, where he became a highly regarded trance
Intimately coupled with this commitment to medium in the mid-1850s. As he struggled to pre-
reform was the spiritualists’ belief in eternal serve his sanity from possession by the spirits,
progress and evolution, both here and after death. however, he came to see the dangers inherent in the
In this world, the existence of the American repub- medium’s passivity, and sought refuge in Europe
lic was the crowning proof of progress. In the next and the Near East. There he found both psychoac-
world, in the most common cosmological mythol- tive drugs and a system of active magical practice
ogy adopted by the spiritualists (that of A.J. Davis), involving clairvoyance through magic mirrors and
the soul after death was to progress and ascend sexual magic. On his return to America he founded
to the next level of existence, there to work out the first of several short-lived Rosicrucian orders to
its faults before continuing its inevitable ascent promulgate his teachings. He did not deny the
through an indefinite series of worlds, each higher truths of Spiritualism, though he had denounced
and more perfect than the preceding. An important the immorality and passivity of trance mediums in
corollary of this belief in progress was the spiritu- 1858, but addressed in turn each of the perceived
alists’ conviction that higher truth lay in the future, limitations of Spiritualism. For Randolph, man
not in the past, and in the developed West rather was a spiritual being, independent and immortal,
than in the benighted East. There was simply no who by Imperial Will and active magical practice
room in early Spiritualism for the notion of hidden, could elevate himself in this life to a role in the
secret wisdom or prisca theologia handed down celestial hierarchies. There were spirits of the dead,
from a past Golden Age or preserved among the and mediums could communicate with them, but
adepts and masters of the East. Spiritualism thus far beyond them were the awful denizens — gods,

--- Page 503 ---
1079 SPIRITUALISM
powers and demigods — who ruled the universe. tallized in the mid-1870s in the work of Mme. H.P.
Man could come into contact with them through Blavatsky and Col. H.S. Olcott, and it was upon
active clairvoyance and magical practice. Ran- their heads that directly fell the onslaught of threat-
dolph’s ideas had some success among the spiritu- ened Spiritualism. Under the guidance of Mme.
alists of the 1860s and 1870s, but ultimately he was Blavatsky, Olcott in 1875 and after had begun
rejected because of his race and his eccentricities. publicly attacking Spiritualism for precisely the
He committed suicide in Toledo, Ohio in 1875, deficiencies already pointed out by Randolph and
though his work survived in the early > Theosoph- Hardinge, but he had the audacity, following the
ical Society, the > Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor lead of Mme. Blavatsky, to challenge the most fun-
and other occult groups, all of which arose from damental tenant of Spiritualism: the identity of the
and built upon a spiritualist base. communicating spirit. According to Blavatsky, the
Emma Hardinge Britten (1823-1899) was far entity that most often communicated at seances
more an integral part of Spiritualism. Born in Eng- was the discarded psychic shell of the dead, and not
land and trained as a pianist and singer, she came the departed’s immortal spirit. The outrage was
to New York in 1855 and almost immediately enormous as every prominent spiritualist joined in
embraced Spiritualism and became an inspirational denouncing the superstition of what came to be
medium. Until her death, she labored mightily in called “magical spiritualism”, but when the uproar
the cause of Spiritualism, crisscrossing the United settled down, Spiritualism itself had been trans-
States, Australia and Great Britain to deliver the formed and had incorporated into its shared pre-
spirits’ message. Her short standard instructions suppositions the leading thoughts of occultism:
for conducting seances are still in use in spiritualist active will, individual spiritual development, mag-
circles today, and her two massive histories of the ical practice, and hierarchies of beings besides man
early days of Spiritualism are indispensable to the above and below him on the cosmic ladder — all of
student. Despite this effort and enthusiasm, how- which, together with the idea of > reincarnation
ever, Hardinge’s Spiritualism was in many surpris- derived from Theosophy, formed the koine of Spir-
ing ways unorthodox. itualism as it entered the 2oth century.
By her account, her occult life began long before
she left England where she had functioned as a 6. SPIRITUALISM IN ENGLAND
magnetic subject with a magical group in London Word of the new movement reached England
she called the Orphic Circle. The group was secret, almost as soon as it began. A.J. Davis’s Principles
but the details of its workings were told by of Nature had been published simultaneously in
Hardinge (in the person of the Chevalier Louis America and England in 1847, and the first Amer-
de B., one of the group’s members) in novel form in ican medium, Mrs. Maria Hayden, reached Lon-
Ghost Land, in 1876, and in Art Magic, a treatise don in 1852, where she caught the attention of >
on magic and the magical world published later the Edward Bulwer-Lytton, Earl Stanhope, Dr. John
same year, both of which excited a storm of protest Ashburner, Ms. Anna Blackwell and many others
among the spiritualists. For Louis/Hardinge, the of the fringe intelligentsia, and started the first Eng-
universe was the familiar univercoelum of A.J. lish spiritualist journal, The Spirit World (1853).
Davis, but it was populated by far more than liy- She was the first of a wave of American mediums,
ing and dead humans, and, with proper instruc- including P.B. Randolph and the repatriated Emma
tion and practice, men, both in this life and after Hardinge, to descend on England, and American
death, could become ‘God-men — heavenly men, mediums held a place of preference there until the
strong and mighty Powers, Thrones, Dominions, 1880s. In 1855, the Scotch-born but American-
World-Builders, glorious hierarchies of Sun-bright raised Daniel Dunglas Home (1833-1886) ap-
Souls . . . Gods in person’ in a never-ending ascen- peared in London and created a furor among the
sion through the celestial hierarchies. Louis/Har- upper classes for whom he presented his phenome-
dinge’s most lasting lesson to Spiritualism was that nal powers. According to the awed accounts of his
there were ‘no phenomena produced by disembod- visitors, with his helping spirits he was able to lev-
ied spirits, which may not be effected by the still itate himself at will, fly in and out of open win-
embodied human spirit, provided a correct knowl- dows, rock massive tables and play instruments —
edge of these powers is directed by a strong and all more or less in the light. Home made no contri-
powerful will’. bution to the philosophy of Spiritualism, but was
This mixture of occultism, adepts, astral projec- the most successful of the phenomenal mediums
tion, secret societies and practical techniques of and enjoys the reputation (not totally accurate) of
individualization and spiritual development crys- never having been exposed or caught in trickery.

--- Page 504 ---
SPIRITUALISM 1080
By the end of the 1850s, England was home to a Baron Dupotet (1796-1881) and Louis-Alphonse
large number of spiritualists, divided largely along Cahagnet (1809-1885), who had extended the
class and regional lines. The first major spiritualist boundaries of Mesmerism to embrace many of the
journal was The Yorkshire Spiritual Telegraph and phenomena and experiences of Spiritualism and
British Harmonial Advocate (1855-1859), largely what came to be called magical Spiritualism. By the
devoted to accounts of the wonders of the seance, time American Spiritualism reached France in
followed by The London Spiritual Magazine (1860- 1849, their investigations had already established
1877), a Christian monthly edited by Thomas the existence of the trance state (“somnambulism”)
Shorter and William Wilkinson. The pre-eminent and the value of drugs and magic mirrors for con-
journal of the early period was The Spiritualist tacting the dead and the celestial hierarchies, and
Newspaper (1869-1882), devoted to the investiga- Cahagnet’s book The Celestial Telegraph, which
tion and analysis of the phenomena of Spiritualism. was published in English in 1848, was of consider-
England’s great contribution to Spiritualism was able value in confirming the truths of Spiritualism
organizational and analytical. While there had among the educated Americans.
been halfhearted and unsuccessful efforts to organ- The situation of Spiritualism in France is further
ize Spiritualism in America beginning in the 1860s, complicated by the doctrines of its leading early
they came to naught over the fierce independence exponent, Hypolyte Léon Denizard Rivail (> Allan
of the American spiritualists and their aversion to Kardec, 1804-1869). His approach to Spiritualism
dogmatic formulation, and an American National was doctrinal, and he drew his doctrines from the
Association of Spiritualists emerged only in the spirits themselves, through the lips of his mag-
1890s and then only as a means of garbing Spiritu- netized somnambules. His Le Livre des Esprits
alism, for practical and political reasons, as a (1857), which taught the multiplicity of inhabited
church — a fact that would have struck the early worlds and the role of a personal God as well as the
adherents of Spiritualism as preposterous. Provin- survival of the individual soul, has never since been
cial British spiritualists, largely middle class in out of print in many languages and in a variety of
background, united under the influence of Emma countries, and it has become the Bible of the lead-
Hardinge Britten to form the Spiritualists National ing current of French Spiritualism — denominated
Federation in 1891 and the organization continues “spiritism” to distinguish it, and especially its
today as the Spiritualists National Union. The spir- belief in reincarnation on this earth, from Ameri-
itualists of London, a more educated lot, first can and British Spiritualism. For a time in the
organized as the (British) National Association of 1860s and 1870s, two rival French spiritualist
Spiritualists, then as the Central Association of papers, Kardec’s Revue Spirite (1858-) and Z.
Spiritualists, both of which struggled to reconcile Piérart’s Revue Spiritualiste (1855-1870), strug-
the members’ conflicting interests and then ex- gled for supremacy on behalf of the competing
pired, to be replaced by the London Spiritualists streams of thought, but by the end of the century
Alliance under the direction of William Stainton spiritism had triumphed in France. At the Interna-
Moses (“M.A. Oxon.”), a noted writing medium tional Spiritist and Spiritualist Congress organized
and author. The LSA survives today as the College in Paris in 1889 with the young Gérard Encausse
of Psychic Sciences — which reveals in its name the (> Papus) as secretary, the attempt was made to
transformations that early Spiritualism has under- formulate an agreement at least on the two funda-
gone since its founding. Britain also pioneered the mental points of (American) Spiritualism, belief in
secular, intentionally disinterested and supposedly the immortality of the soul and in communication
scientific study of the phenomena of Spiritualism in with the spirits of the dead, but the attempt came to
isolation from its doctrine - an attempt that after naught over the spiritists’ insistence on the special
120 years has proved inconclusive. The Society for position to be accorded Kardec’s works.
Psychical Research was begun in 1883, with such While the first mediums from the U.S. and Eng-
eminences as W.S. Moses and E.W.H. Myers as land visited Germany in the early 1850s, Spiritual-
members, and later included such noted historians ism took root there only slowly. As had been the
of Spiritualism as Frank Podmore. case in France, it immediately accommodated itself
to pre-existing movements, especially idealism and
7. SPIRITUALISM OUTSIDE Mesmerism (as exemplified in the Odic researches
ENGLISH-SPEAKING COUNTRIES of Baron Karl von Reichenbach, 1788-1869), and
The origins of Spiritualism in France were com- the fascination with the visions and powers of the
plicated by the existence there of a well-developed Seeress of Prevorst (Friederike Hauffe (1801-1829)
form of Mesmerism, exemplified in the work of [> Justinus Kerner]. The first spiritualist journal in

--- Page 505 ---
IoO81 SPIRITUALISM
Germany, Psyche: Deutsche Zeitschrift fiir Odwis- influential Annali dello Spiritismo in Italia, begun
senschaft und Geisterkunde (Grossenhein, 1865- in Turin the next year by Niceforo Filalete (ps. of
1866), appropriately, reflected these interests in its Vincenzo Scarpa), which functioned as the clear-
title. The most notable characteristic of Spiritual- inghouse for information on Spiritualism in Italy
ism in Germany was its broader acceptance in intel- and throughout the rest of the century.
lectual and scientific circles, an acceptance that It is always easier to discern the presence and
Spiritualism never came to have in the rest of the activity of the literate classes, since they were the
world. This is exemplified by the work of Johann ones who have left traces in the surviving periodi-
Karl Friedrich Zéllner (1834-1882) and Gustav cals and publications, but the widespread nature
Theodor Fechner (1801-1887) in studying the of spiritualist activity in Spain and Italy can be
slate-reading abilities of the American medium gleaned from the existence of local societies whose
Henry Slade in Leipzig in the late 1870s. The fact only surviving record is their name. There were
that recourse was had to a foreign medium is over a hundred each in Spain and Italy by 1875,
indicative of the movement’s lack of penetration many with their own small journal, indicating an
among the population in general, though there active recourse to Spiritualism that continues even
were indigenous German-speaking mediums, such today, although Spiritualism there — as everywhere —
as the Hungarian Baroness Adelma von Vay (1840- has been profoundly modified by Theosophic and
1925). The most influential German-language occult ideas. In Spain and Italy also, as in all of the
spiritualist journal was the monthly Psychische Catholic countries to which it spread, Spiritualism
Studien (1874-1925, and then as Zeitschrift fur rediscovered its original “progressive” political
Parapsychologie until 1934). Paradoxically, it was nature, intermingling it with a decidedly anticleri-
founded and edited by the Russian Aleksandr N. cal tone.
Aksakov (1832-1903). Censorship in Russia had The most striking example of the successful
prevented its publication there, as it had forced spread of Spiritualism (and of its ability to accom-
Rebus (1881), an earlier Russian spiritualist jour- modate new strains of thought) is provided by
nal that Aksakov financially supported, to be dis- Brazil. By the early 1870s, Spiritualism in its
guised as a puzzle magazine. Psychische Studien Kardecist form had reached Brazil, where it ini-
combined accounts of spiritualist phenomena (many tially enjoyed wide support among the wealthy
of them from British and American journals) with classes of European background despite opposition
theoretical discussions of Spiritualism and its phe- from the Catholic Church. The first journal was
nomena contributed by leading scholars, all tend- begun as early as 1876, and the Federagao Espirita
ing over time in the direction of parapsychology Brasileira, which continues today, was founded in
and away from the original simple notions of 1884. Spiritualism in Brazil is perhaps the most
American Spiritualism. active form of Spiritualism in the world at present,
In Spain, Spiritualism had existed in isolated though it has taken two distinct paths, largely dis-
pockets even before arrival of the teachings of tinguished along class lines: one branch continues
Allan Kardec in the late 1850s, but it was his books the “pure” spiritism of Allan Kardec and the other
that set the tone for and determined the path of intermingles Kardec’s ideas with beliefs and prac-
Spiritualism in Spain in the late rg9th century. The tices based upon Umbanda and Candomble and
revolution of 1868 freed the movement from other alternative religions of African derivation.
Catholic censorship (there had been an auto-da-fe By the time of the First World War, Spiritualism
of spiritualist publications as early as 1857), and by worldwide had been transformed by its incorpora-
1888 the Spanish spiritualists hosted the “Con- tion of the leading elements of western occultism,
greso Internacional Espirita”. The leading early Theosophy and ~ New Thought and, in America,
journals were El Criterio Espiritista of Madrid by its adoption of the outward form of a peripheral
(1869) and La Luz del Porvenir of Barcelona, pub- Christian church. At present it is distinguished —
lished by the poetess Amalia Domingo Soler (183 5- from the > New Age generally only by its empha-
1909). sis on mediums and the seance.
In Italy, unlike Spain, Spiritualism developed
both along spiritualist and spiritist (Kardecist) Rev. Gibson Smith (transcriber), Lectures on Clairma-
tiveness: or Human Magnetism, New York: Searing &
lines, prompted initially by the visit of D.D. Home
Prall, 1845 @ Andrew Jackson Davis, The Principles
there in 1854. The first Italian-language journal,
of Nature, Her Divine Revelations, and a Voice to
L’Amore del Vero, appeared in 1863, contenting Mankind, New York: S.S. Lyon & W. Fishbough, 1847
itself with recounting tales of spiritualistic wonders @ L.A. Cahagnet, The Celestial Telegraph; or, Secrets of
from foreign journals, but it was superseded by the the Life to Come Revealed Through Magnetism,

--- Page 506 ---
SPIRITUALISM 1082
2 vols., 1848, repr. 1 vol., New York: Arno, 1976 tish minister who had settled there in 1622. As a
E.W. Capron, Modern Spiritualism: Its Facts and youth, he showed keen interest in natural history,
Fanaticisms, its Consistencies and Contradictions, and made detailed observations of insects, espe-
New York: Bela Marsh & Partridge & Brittan, 1854 @ cially their metamorphoses. When he left Bermuda
Isaac Post, Voices from the Spirit World: Being Com-
is unclear, but as early as 1639 one of his deceased
munications From Many Spirits By The Hand OfIsaac
Post, Medium, Rochester, NY: C.H. McDonell, 1852 @ father’s associates wrote to John Winthrop, gover-
Emma Hardinge Britten, Art Magic; or, Mundane, Sub- nor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, looking for
Mundane and Super-Mundane Spiritism, New York: educational opportunities for the young Starkey. In
Author, 1876 @ idem, Autobiography of Emma 1643, Starkey matriculated at the fledgling Har-
Hardinge Britten, Manchester and London, 1900 ¢ vard College, where he received the bachelor of arts
idem (trans. and ed.), Ghost Land, or, Researches into
degree in 1646, and the master’s probably in 1649.
the Mysteries of Occultism, Boston: Author, 1876
In 1644, he embarked upon his life-long study of idem, Modern American Spiritualism: Twenty Years’
Record of the Communion between Earth and the chemistry and its medical applications; already
World of Spirits, New York: Author, 1870, repr. New towards the end of the summer of 1645 he began
York: University Books, 1970 @ idem, Nineteenth Cen- practical experiments in search of the Philoso-
tury Miracles; or, Spirits and Their Work in Every phers’ Stone. Soon becoming acquainted with the
Country of the Earth, London and Manchester:
writings of > Joan Baptista Van Helmont, Starkey
William Britten, 1883.
quickly added the alkahest and the volatilization of
Lit.: Ann Braude, “News from the Spirit World: A alkalies to his list of sought-after secrets. By 1648,
Checklist of American Spiritualist Periodicals”, Pro- at the age of twenty-one, he had also developed a
ceedings of the American Antiquarian Society 99 flourishing medical practice in New England. Dur-
(1989), 399-462 @ idem, Radical Spirits: Spiritualism ing his time in the Massachusetts Bay Colony he
and Women’s Rights in Nineteenth-Century America, associated with John Winthrop, Jr., first governor
Boston: Beacon Press, 1989 @ David J. Hess, Samba in
of Connecticut, who was himself interested in
the Night: Spiritism in Brazil, New York: Columbia
alchemy, as well as with many skilled metallurgists, University Press, 1994 # R. Laurence Moore, In Search
of White Crows: Spiritualism, Parapsychology, and physicians, and technicians. In early 1650, Starkey
American Culture, New York: Oxford UP, 1977 @ married a daughter of Colonel Israel Stoughton,
Geoffrey K. Nelson, Spiritualism and Society, London: but whether they had any children is unknown.
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1969 Janet Oppenheim, In late 1650, Starkey left New England for Lon-
The Other World: Spiritualism and Psychical Research
don because, as he later recalled, he was unable
in England, 1850-1914, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
to conduct laboratory experiments adequately in
versity Press, 1985 # Frank Podmore, Mediums of the
Nineteenth Century, 2 vols., New Hyde Park: Univer- Massachusetts owing to the scarcity of fit equip-
sity Books, 1963 Jenny Hazelgrove, Spiritualism and ment and supplies. In London he met the intelli-
British Society between the Wars, Manchester/New gencer and German emigré Samuel Hartlib —- who
York: Manchester University Press, 2000 @ Diethard had received reports of Starkey’s prowess some
Sawicki, Leben mit den Toten: Geisterglauben und years earlier — and was introduced to the circle of
die Entstehung des Spiritismus in Deutschland 1770-
reformers and projectors gathered around him. In
1900, Paderborn: Schoningh, 2002.
January 1651, he met ~ Robert Boyle (possibly
JOHN PATRICK DEVENEY acting as his physician) and soon thereafter he
began tutoring Boyle in chemistry, introducing him
particularly to Helmontian ideas. Starkey shared
Starkey, George (ps.: Eirenaeus several of his most treasured chemical secrets with
Philalethes), * 8 or 9.6.1628 Bermuda, Boyle, and Boyle partly financed Starkey’s work,
t+ summer 1665 London including the preparation of ens veneris, a Hel-
montian pharmaceutical. Starkey’s formative influ-
The character of George Starkey has long been ence on the young Boyle was profound.
eclipsed by that of his fictional creation the alchem- Despite Starkey’s success as a physician, he gave
ical adept Eirenaeus Philalethes, “author” of some up his practice in the early 1650s to devote himself
of the 17th century’s most influential and popular fully to his research after the arcana maiora. Unfor-
treatises on transmutational > alchemy. Starkey’s tunately, this decision, together with the depletion
books, published both under his own name and of his wife’s dowry, resulted in his imprisonment
under that of Philalethes, render him the most for debt in 1653. After his release, possibly helped
widely read scientific writer from the New World by Boyle, he resumed his studies and later pub-
until Benjamin Franklin. lished two works on Helmontian pharmacy —
Starkey was born in Bermuda, the son of a Scot- Natures Explication and Helmont’s Vindication

--- Page 507 ---
1083 STARKEY
(1657) and Pyrotechny Asserted (1658) — which lalethes treatises was long a matter of controversy,
incorporated his new laboratory findings. For it is now clear that Starkey was in fact their true
much of the remainder of his short life, Starkey was author. Significantly, in the Vade-mecum philo-
embroiled in financial and legal difficulties, and sophicum (published 1678), Philalethes is cast as
published only brief tracts and broadsides advertis- the student of a master named Agricola Rhomaeus.
ing his medicines or asserting his priority over This name is revealed as a clever and learned word-
preparations co-opted by others. In the well- play by translating the Latin first name into Greek
known mid-century battle of Helmontian “chymi- and the Greek last name into Scottish dialect,
cal physicians” versus the predominantly Galenic which gives us “georgios stark”, as the true master,
medical establishment, Starkey was a vociferous and indeed creator, of Philalethes. Starkey hid his
champion of the former. Finally, during the Great authorship so well that even his friend Boyle did
Plague of 1665, while the Royal College of Physi- not know the truth, and long after Starkey’s death
cians fled London, Starkey and several fellow Hel- Boyle endeavored to contact the elusive Philalethes
montians remained, with the result that Starkey whom he believed to be living in France.
himself caught the plague and died. Starkey’s surviving laboratory notebooks, re-
In 1651, Starkey had begun telling of an anony- cently published, reveal him as an extraordinarily
mous alchemical adept he had known in New Eng- careful and able experimenter. Starkey combined
land. This adept, who would later bear the name of his practical laboratory prowess with scholastic
Eirenaeus Philalethes (“Peaceful Lover of Truth”), methods of logical inquiry and textual analysis and
allegedly demonstrated transmutation before Star- the Helmontian emphasis on quantitative analysis
key and gave him a small portion of the White and weight determination. These private notes
Stone as well as several manuscripts dealing with reveal how a prominent mid-17th century al-
how to make the Stone. Starkey circulated what he chemist carried out his daily researches, reflecting
claimed to be some of these “American” manu- upon practical results, deriving theories therefrom,
scripts in the Hartlib Circle where they were eagerly and using theory in return to propose new “conjec-
received. Starkey’s first publication, appearing tural processes” to be tested in the fire. Moreover,
under the name of Eirenaeus Philoponus Phi- Starkey’s writings also reveal much about the secre-
lalethes (he had used the name Philalethes Philo- tive, allegorical style of alchemical treatises, for
ponus for himself privately in 1651), was the verse while the Philalethes tracts contain some of the
treatise Marrow of Alchemy (1654-5). This work most elaborate and bizarre imagery in all of
deals with making the Philosophers’ Stone, but also alchemy, the very same processes are described in
recounts the tale of Starkey’s dealings with the mys- clear, detailed, and reproducible terms in Starkey’s
terious adept; while Starkey here veils his own private papers and letters. Thus, the conscious use
name in anagrams (“Egregius Christo” and “Vir of alchemical Decknamen and allegory to encode
gregis custos”) and casts himself only as an “edi- practical laboratory secrets in a measured, organ-
tor,” he later acknowledged his authorship of the ized way is apparent. Starkey also developed cor-
book. In late 1655, during Starkey’s absence from puscular theories of matter, expressed both in
London owing to his employment in mineral works works published under his own name and under
at Bristol, one of the circulated “Philalethes” man- that of Philalethes.
uscripts was published without his knowledge.
This work, the Epistle of George Ripley to King Natures Explication and Helmont’s Vindication, Lon-
Edward IV Unfolded, was the only other Phi- don, 1657 # Pyrotechny Asserted, London, 1658 @
Liquor Alchahest, London, 1675 @ Alchemical Labo-
lalethes text published during Starkey’s lifetime.
ratory Notebooks and Correspondence (William R.
After his premature death, however, many more Newman and Lawrence M. Principe, eds.), Chicago:
manuscripts which had circulated during his life- University of Chicago Press, 2005 @ [Eirenaeus Philo-
time were eagerly sought after, published, and ponus Philalethes], The Marrow of Alchemy, London,
studied. These treatises adopt a “Mercurialist” 1654-1655 @ [Eirenaeus Philalethes], Introitus apertus
approach to the Stone; they argue that a special ad occlusum regis palatium, Amsterdam, 1667 Rip-
ley Reviv’d, London, 1678 @ Alchemical Works: Eire-
philosophical mercury is to be prepared from com-
naeus Philalethes Compiled (S. Merrow Broddle, ed.),
mon mercury, and this substance then digested
Boulder: Cinnabar, 1994.
with gold over a lengthy period of time to provide
the transmuting powder. The Philalethes works Lit.: Harold Jantz, “America’s First Cosmopolitan”,
were favored by, among many others, Sir > Isaac Proceedings of the Massachusetts Historical Society 84
Newton. (1972), 3-25 @ William R. Newman, Gehennical Fire:
Although the identity of the author of the Phi- The Lives of George Starkey, an American Alchemist in

--- Page 508 ---
STARKEY 1084
the Scientific Revolution, Cambridge, MA: Harvard (Technische Hochschule), with the intention of
University Press, 1994 @ idem, “Newton’s Clavis as becoming a teacher at a Realschule. Nevertheless,
Starkey’s Key”, Isis 78 (1987), 564-574 idem and his most inspiring teacher during this period was
Lawrence M. Principe, Alchemy Tried in the Fire:
Karl Julius Schréer (1825-1900), who was neither
Starkey, Boyle, and the Fate of Helmontian Chymistry,
a mathematician nor a physicist, but a rather iso-
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002 @ G.H.
Turnbull, “George Stirk, Philosopher by Fire”, Publi- lated professor of German literature. Schroer has
cations of the Colonial Society of Massachusetts, been a very important influence on Steiner. He
Transactions 1947-51 38 (1959), 219-251. introduced him to > Goethe and the thought of the
Weimarer Klassik in general, which was to become
LAWRENCE M. PRINCIPE one of Steiner’s most important preoccupations in
the years to come. Schréer was one of the few to
Steiner, Rudolf, * 25.2.1861 Kraljevec seriously study the very philosophical, but in the
(Croatia), ft 30.3.1925 Dornach mind of many also very undramatic and unper-
(Switzerland) formable second part of Goethe’s Faust. Steiner
would later not only give extensive commentaries
Rudolf Steiner was born in Kraljevec, Croatia on it, but would also bring it to the stage in its
(then part of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire) on entirety.
25 February 1861, although his official birthday is Furthermore, Steiner took many courses in
the 27th, the day he was baptised. He was an eld- philosophy, especially those taught by Robert Zim-
est son, with a sister and a younger brother born mermann (1824-1898) and Franz Brentano (1838-
later. Having worked originally as a forester, 1917). Although as a student he took a very critical
Steiner’s father was employed at the Austrian rail- attitude towards these figures, Brentano’s philoso-
ways, mostly in the more remote parts of the Aus- phy in particular was to become a life-long interest.
trian-Hungarian empire. Steiner received a formal In his later Von Seelenratseln (On Enigmas of the
Roman-Catholic education, but this was largely Soul, 1917) Steiner states that a consistent elabora-
for reasons of tradition and conformism: his father tion of Brentano’s phenomenology would have led
considered himself a Freigeist (“free spirit”) and the man straight to a more spiritual understanding
had strong anti-clerical sentiments. of the human soul, something which, however,
Already as a child, Rudolf had clairvoyant expe- Brentano himself never achieved. Again, Steiner’s
riences. When he was seven years old, he had a most important philosophical studies were extra-
vision of an aunt committing suicide, but could not curricular. Right at the beginning of his student
share this experience with either his parents or any- years, he discovered the Wissenschaftslehre by
one else in his surroundings. As he tells us in his Johann Gottlieb Fichte (1762-1814), which pro-
autobiography, he instead retreated into his soul, vided him with the basis on which the rest of his
finding there an inner life that was full of spiritual philosophical work would be built. Fichte’s philos-
experiences, especially with regard to the beautiful ophy centres around the “I” (Ich) that posits itself
natural surroundings that formed the background in an act of non-empirical self-perception. The “I”
of his youth. The only comfort in his loneliness was is thus the self-identical centre or focal point of all
geometry, which showed him a world of the spirit diverse and qualitatively different acts of con-
that was completely detached from sensible, mate- sciousness. Having discovered by means of Fichte
rial reality. Geometry as well as science, especially the true nature of the human spirit and its pure
cosmology, were among his earliest interests. In thought activity, Steiner then struggled with the
October 1872 Steiner entered the Realschule, a question of finding the bridge from this solipsistic
technical high school in Wiener Neustadt, graduat- “I” to external nature. The answer came in 1881-
ing with great success in 1879. At age sixteen, he 1882 by means of his contact with Felix Kogutzki
discovered Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason which (1833-1909) a collector of medicinal herbs who
he clandestinely read during the boring history les- lived in the country, but whom he met on the train
sons, but without finding any answers to the ques- to Vienna, where Kogutzki sold his herbs. Kogutzki
tions that occupied him, and without being aware transmitted to Steiner a non-academic, traditional
of Kant’s place in the history of philosophy. On the and spiritual knowledge of nature, which the latter
whole, Steiner was very much a self-taught pupil, would later refer to as the last vestiges of Rosi-
finding his own way in German literature, philoso- crucian wisdom [- Rosicrucianism]. In his four
phy and higher trigonometry and calculus. Mystery Dramas of 1910-1913, Steiner gives a por-
In 1879 Steiner registered as a student of geo- trayal of Kogutzki in the person of Felix Balde. In
metry and physics at the Technical University the so-called “Document of Barr”, a series of auto-

--- Page 509 ---
1085 STEINER
biographical notes for the French theosophist > philosophy, which can be seen as a reintroduction
Edouard Schuré (1841-1929), and in an autobio- of the objective idealism of Hegel and Schelling at
graphical lecture of 4 February 1913, Steiner a time when philosophy was dominated by the sub-
emphasizes that Kogutzki acted as an intermediary jectivism and anti-Idealism of neo-Kantianism.
who introduced him to an even more important Steiner, however, did not simply restore Hegel’s
person. Using theosophical terminology, he refers abstract speculations, but combined his dialectical
to this person as one of his two “Masters”, who method with the empiricism or phenomenology of
initiated him (the other one being Christian Rosen- Goethe and a conception of the free, non-empirical
creutz himself). Steiner suggests that in the years thought activity of the “I” that was ultimately
following his “initiation”, this unknown “Master” derived from Fichte. In fact, whereas Goethe had
gave him a few further tasks. He was to devote him- claimed ‘never to have thought about thinking
self, first, to the respiritualisation of the decadent, itself’, Steiner applied Goethe’s phenomenological
materialist Western civilisation, and especially its method not just to external phenomena but to
intellectual foundation, the physical sciences; and thought activity itself.
second, to the public teaching of a Christian, non- Steiner had to develop this philosophy in a non-
Oriental understanding of > reincarnation and academic context. In 1882, he had decided to quit
karma. his studies and devote his time to the Kiirschner
The only tangible outcome of this encounter edition and other literary activities. In order to gain
with Kogutzki is a manuscript that Steiner sent to a living he was forced to become a private tutor in
the philosopher Friedrich Theodor Vischer (1897- rich Viennese households. His most memorable job
1888) in 1882 and that was found in Vischer’s was with the rich Jewish family Specht, that had
Nachlafs in 1938. In this manuscript, entitled “Ein- many connections with members of the Viennese
zig mogliche Kritik der atomistischen Begriffe” elite, including Sigmund Freud’s collaborator Josef
(Only Possible Critique of Atomist Concepts), Breuer (1842-1925). Steiner’s education of the
Steiner sketches how pure thought can grasp youngest, mentally retarded son was such a success
what he calls the “Ideas”: pure, non-empirical that the boy was later able to get a university edu-
essences reminiscent of Plato, which can then be cation and become a dermatologist. These experi-
recognised in nature through sense experience. In ences and the ones with his own deaf and dumb
this way, nature can be seen as the external revela- younger brother became the basis of his later Heil-
tion of the spirit that man can also sense from padagogie, an orthopedagogical method geared at
within. This conviction would become the nucleus the mentally handicapped that has become an
of Steiner’s subsequent philosophical and scientific international movement. In this period, Steiner
work. also became a political editor of the Deutsche
Soon after his contact with Kogutzki, Steiner Wochenschrift and came into touch with members
started reading Goethe’s works on the natural sci- of the cultural elite of Vienna, such as the poets
ences. Through the mediation of Schroer, this led in Marie Eugenie delle Grazie (1864-1931) and Rosa
1882 to an invitation by Josef Kirschner to edit Mayreder (1858-1938), and the neo-Thomist
these works for his “Deutsche National-Literatur”. professor of theology Wilhelm Neumann (1837-
Steiner would only finish this project in 1897. In his 1919). The poet Friedrich Eckstein, personal secre-
introductions and notes, and in publications such tary of the composer Anton Bruckner, introduced
as his 1886 Grundlinien einer Erkenntnistheorie Steiner to + alchemy, Rosicrucian writings, mod-
der Goetheschen Weltanschauung (Basic outlines ern theosophy [~ Theosophical Society] (Sinnet’s
of an epistemology of the Goethean worldview, Esoteric Buddhism and Mabel Collins’ Light on
1886), Steiner states that Goethe’s work in the nat- the Path) and the theosophical circle around Marie
ural sciences was more than just a haphazard set of Lang (1858-1938). In letters and personal conver-
empirical observations combined with a poetical, sation with Rosa Mayreder, however, Steiner still
idealist look at nature; it was the application of a showed himself quite critical of the “Schwachgeis-
consistent epistemology, which Steiner calls phe- terei” (feeble-mindedness) of the theosophists.
nomenological. Steiner describes Goethe’s method From the correspondence between Eckstein and
as a path that leads from empirical observation to Steiner we learn that Steiner was, nevertheless, pro-
the experience of the objective Ideal Type; in the foundly interested in Eckstein’s discoveries of the
case of plants this is the so-called “Urpflanze”, the alchemical and Rosicrucian symbolism in Goethe’s
objective Idea that underlies the diverse appear- Marchen (The Fairytale of the Green Snake and the
ances and metamorphoses in empirical reality. White Lily), his unfinished Geheimnisse (Secrets)
Thus, in the 1880s and 1890s Steiner developed his and Faust Il. In fact, this kind of esoteric reading of

--- Page 510 ---
STEINER 1086
Goethe’s poetical works would later mark Steiner’s hand, and the dominant Schopenhauerian pes-
transition from his philosophical to his esoteric simism, naturalism and anti-intellectualism, on the
career. other. Both parts of the book are clearly compli-
Steiner’s work on the Kiirschner-edition led to an mentary and centre around the concept of freedom.
invitation from the recently grounded Goethe- The act of knowledge presupposes a free act of
Archives in Weimar to edit Goethe’s works on nat- human consciousness, while free, moral acts pre-
ural sciences in the framework of the new, critical suppose knowledge of the situation through the
edition, the famous Weimarer Ausgabe. Steiner Intuition. Both epistemology and ethics are con-
moved to Weimar in 1890 and stayed there until cerned with the free human act, which is neverthe-
1897. He complained bitterly about the bad salary less part of an objective reality that, precisely
and the boring philological work, but found the through these free human acts, has the character of
time to write his main philosophical works during an evolving, dynamic whole. In 1918, long after
his Weimar period. These are, first, his doctoral dis- Steiner changed his philosophical for his esoteric
sertation, which was accepted by the University of career, Steiner issued a second edition of this work,
Rostock in 1891 and turned into a book in 1892 which substantially differed from the original one.
under the title Wahrheit und Wissenschaft: Vor- He now claimed that the individual appropriation
spiel einer Philosophie der Fretheit (Truth and Sci- of its contents by the reader would provide the
ence: Prelude to a Philosophy of Freedom); second, experiential basis for a spiritual path that turns
his opus magnum, the Philosophie der Freiheit conventional, materialist thought into an organ for
(Philosophy of Freedom) of 1894; and third, his spiritual experiences by which the free individual
1895 book on Nietzsche, Friedrich Nietzsche: Ein gains access to the spiritual world. While there is
Kampfer gegen seine Zeit (Friedrich Nietzsche: A certainly a certain tension between the “philosoph-
Fighter Against His Time). ical” version of 1894 and the “esoteric” version of
Steiner’s high hopes that his philosophical work 1918, it must be said that the description of the
would gain him a professorship at one of the uni- intuition in 1894 as a non-empirical, spiritual
versities in the German-speaking world were never (“geistiges”) capture of the objective idea does con-
fulfilled. Especially his main philosophical work, stitute a bridge to Steiner’s talk of a spiritual world
the Philosophie der Freiheit, did not receive the and spiritual experiences in 1918.
attention and appreciation he had hoped for. In this During Steiner’s Weimar years, Elisabeth Forster,
work, Steiner develops his definitive version of Friedrich Nietzsche’s sister, tried to engage him in
objective idealism. The world initially appears to her project of editing both the published and the
us in its separation between sensible experience unpublished works of her brother, who had now
(“Beobachtung”) and intelligible idea (“Begriff”), fully fallen victim to mental illness; but these
or in other words, matter and form of knowledge. attempts ended in an open conflict. These circum-
By uniting the experience of the object with its stances may perhaps explain, partially at least, the
non-empirical idea in the act of knowledge, the surprising contents of Steiner’s small book on Nietz-
human mind restores the original unity of Essence sche of 1895. It consists of a short summary of the
(“Begriff”) and Appearance (“Beobachtung”) of main elements of Nietzsche’s philosophy, com-
the object itself. This act of knowledge is a free cre- bined with remarkably extensive passages in which
ation of the human spirit that by its very creation is Steiner praises Nietzsche as an unzeitgemdfe hero
part of evolving reality itself. Steiner thus strongly who shows us a way out of our decadent civilisa-
repudiated the neo-Kantian subjectivism that dom- tion. These passages stand in stark contrast to the
inated the philosophical scene in his days. While criticisms of Nietzsche voiced by Steiner prior to
the first part of the book develops his epistemology, 1895, and especially to a number of publications
the second part propounds his ethics, which has its from 1899 onwards, which speak of Nietzsche’s
center in the free individual. Moral acts are not a philosophy as a ‘psychopathological problem’ and
matter of obedience to general rules or abstract as the ramblings of a man ‘who is not one of the
duties, but acts which originate in knowledge of a leading figures of the age’. Part of the explanation
unique situation which is founded upon a freely may be, not only that Steiner hoped to be able to
captured idea (“Intuition”). This general idea flee from the Goethe Archives and work for Elisa-
becomes individualized through the moral subject’s beth Forster, but also that his book on Nietzsche
individual feelings and experience, or in other immediately followed his own main philosophical
words through love and respect for other people work. Steiner fully identifies himself with his sub-
and through moral phantasy. Steiner here criticizes ject, and to a large extent his summaries tell us
the abstract duty ethics of the Kantians, on the one more about his own philosophy than about that of

--- Page 511 ---
1087 STEINER
Nietzsche. This is especially true of the concept of Moreover, in the years immediately after 1900
Ubermensch (Superman), which Steiner interprets Steiner not only became active within the > Theo-
as the free, autonomous individual that becomes sophical Society, but simultaneously grew closer to
intellectually aware of his own motives of action, Christianity as well. The very combination of these
realising these while respecting the autonomy of two facts already makes it clear that Steiner occu-
the other members of his community. Steiner thus pied a rather unique place within the theosophical
explains away Nietzsche’s biologism, his anti-intel- current. In 1900 he was asked by Countess Brock-
lectualism, his glorification of unconsciousness dorff, leader of a theosophical circle in Berlin, to
impulses and the Superman’s destructive, anti- give a memorial lecture on Nietzsche, who had died
social and profoundly egoistic behaviour. After in the same year. This led to an invitation for
having completed his book, Steiner was introduced further lectures. Steiner now decided to speak
to Nietzsche himself. According to his own much about Goethes geheime Offenbarung (Goethe’s
later report in his autobiography, he was able to Secret Revelation), having written an essay under
gain a spiritual insight in Nietzsche’s soul, that the same title in 1899. In his lecture, Steiner dis-
dwelled freely in the spiritual worlds, detached cusses the esoteric, more in particular Rosicrucian
from his ailing body that lay idly on the couch. sources of Goethe’s work, especially in his fairy tale
Whether or not Steiner already fully realized this in on the green snake and the white lily.
the 1890s, it seems that this observation integrated Thus, the transition from Idealist philosopher to
both his positive and negative judgments of Nietz- esoteric teacher was marked by a discussion of
sche. On the whole, he saw Nietzsche as a truly Goethe, who, according to Steiner, not only stood
great mind and a philosophical idealist, who would on an Idealist basis, but was also profoundly
have agreed with most of Steiner’s own philosoph- influenced by the alchemical-Rosicrucian tradition.
ical positions if he had not, due to his weak sense of In his explanation of Goethe’s fairy tale, Steiner
objective truth, become a victim of the materialism states that the snake that sacrifices itself stands for
and scientism of his age, leading him to his bizarre the lower forces of the soul which have to be trans-
and even dangerous later philosophy that was but formed in order to serve as a bridge to the higher,
a prelude to his insanity. spiritual worlds. After this, the secret temple,
In 1897 Steiner moved to Berlin, where he be- which stands for the old esoteric wisdom and cur-
came the chief editor of the literary journal Maga- rents exemplified by the Rosicrucians, will be able
zin fir Literatur. He engaged in contacts with most to rise to the surface, i.e. become publicly known.
of the leading writers and artists in Berlin. He also In fact, these two themes (as well as many others
became a member of several literary and philo- that can be traced in the fairy tale) of sacrifice and
sophical clubs, such as the circle around Ludwig transformation of the natural soul, and the public
Jakobowski (1868-1900) which comprised writ- revelation of old, secret doctrines preoccupied
ers such as Else Lasker-Schiiler (1869-1945) and Steiner in the following years.
Erich Miithsam (1878-1934), and the Giordano Steiner also lectured on Die Mystik im Aufgang
Bruno Bund founded by Bruno Wille (1860-1928), des neuzeitlichen Geisteslebens (Mysticism at the
which propagated a non-confessional, anti-clerical Dawn of the Modern Age), which he turned into a
monism according to which matter was completely book in r90r. Discussing late medieval and early
permeated by spirit. Moreover, despite his harsh modern “mystics” such as Eckhart, Tauler, >
words about socialism in the Magazin fir Litera- Nicholas of Cusa and > Jakob Boehme, Steiner
tur, Steiner accepted an invitation to teach in the shows that external knowledge of nature and
Arbeiterbildungsschule, a social-democratic school inner, mystical experiences do not exclude each
for the working classes founded by Wilhelm Lieb- other but, on the contrary, mutually enrich each
knecht (1826-1900). It appears that the turn of other. He claims that, mutatis mutandis, modern
century was also a personal turning-point for natural science should be combined with an inner,
Steiner. In his autobiography he speaks about a cru- “mystical” path. On the one hand, this will prevent
cial inner experience that occurred shortly before the spiritual path from drifting off into foggy,
rg9oo: he had a spiritual vision of what he calls the uncontrolled speculation, while on the other, it will
Mystery of Golgotha, Jesus Christ’s redemptive, prevent natural science from becoming materialist
world-transformative death and resurrection. and anti-human. What we witness here is a meta-
In fact, Steiner’s life did change considerably morphosis of his earlier philosophical position
after 1900, though the evolution of his thinking which tried to combine Idealist philosophy not
seems to have taken place gradually. First of all, he only with Goethean physics but also with the mod-
gave up his editorship of the Magazin fiir Literatur. ern scientific method (the subtitle of Philosophy of

--- Page 512 ---
STEINER 1088
Freedom is: “Seelische Beobachtungs-Resultate which he continued to be a member until 1905.
nach naturwissenschaftlicher Methode”, i.e. Steiner considered it important to give a public
“Results of observations of the soul by means of statement of this fact, because of his preoccupation
scientific method”), which is actually quite remi- with the public revelation of old, secret knowledge.
niscent of Brentano’s program of a “scientific” phi- He shared this preoccupation with - Madame
losophy of mind. Steiner now tried to combine Blavatsky, whose Secret Doctrine and other works
spirituality or “mysticism” with modern physics. he had gotten to know and appreciate around
Steiner deepened his relation to the Christian tra- 1902.
dition in a subsequent series of lectures, Das Chris- The following years, Steiner led an amazingly
tentum als mystische Tatsache (Christianity as a productive life as a writer and teacher within
Mystical Fact), which also resulted in a book the Theosophical Society. He founded his own
(1902). Here, Steiner gives his own version of journal, Luzifer-Gnosis and, together with Marie
perennialism [> Tradition]: Christianity was fore- von Sivers, his own publishing house, the Philo-
shadowed by the secret wisdom that was transmit- sophisch-Anthroposophischer Verlag (in 1908). By
ted to a few chosen ones who were allowed to be these means he was able to disseminate an incre-
initiated in the Greek and Egyptian temples. The dible amount of books and lectures, all of which
initiates had to go through inner processes of death were to a certain extent tributary to Blavatsky and
and resurrection, after which they were shown all other theosophists, but also gradually emanci-
kinds of secrets concerning both the macrocosmic pated themselves to a considerable extent from
and microcosmic world. Christ did not just teach theosophical vocabulary and approaches. Despite
these things, but physically went through all these his success as an esoteric teacher, Steiner seems to
processes in broad daylight, thereby turning secret have suffered from being shut off from academic
knowledge into a public, physical fact. Spiritual and general cultural life, given his continued
knowledge, which, until then, had only been acces- attempts at getting academic positions or jobs as a
sible either after natural death or by the artificially- journalist.
induced “inner” death in the temple, could In the years after 1902, Steiner composed a series
henceforth be acquired by each and every person of works that are known as his “basic” books.
by means of our natural, daily consciousness. Among them is Theosophie (Theosophy) of 1904,
In subsequent years, Steiner came to a deeper which contains a spiritual psychology according to
understanding of the importance of precisely this the three-fold division of body, soul and spirit
“mystical” fact. His spiritual experience in 1899 (“Geist”) and the four-fold division of physical
may have made a deep impression, but it neverthe- body, etheric body, astral body and “I”. This “I” or
less took him quite a struggle to shake off his ear- spirit is described as the immortal core which rein-
lier quite dismissive attitude towards Christianity, carnates in a new body. In 1904/1905 Steiner wrote
apparent in his book on Nietzsche and in many his Wie erlangt man Erkenntnisse der héheren Wel-
other places. In the years around 1900, for exam- ten? (How does one attain knowledge of the higher
ple, we find him defending Ernst Haeckel’s (1834- worlds?; translated as “Knowledge of the Higher
1919) version of Darwinism against his creationist Worlds and Its Attainment”) which describes a
critics in a number of publications. True, Steiner path for developing spiritual knowledge of higher
tried to avoid Haeckel’s materialism by combining worlds, divided into the three levels of > imagina-
it with Goethe’s idea of metamorphosis, but he cer- tion, inspiration and intuition. It also contains
tainly did not spare Haeckel’s Christian critics. In Steiner’s version of the theosophical doctrine of
the years after 1900 Steiner was able to find his Chakras. Finally, mention must be made of
own access to what, using theosophical vocabu- Geheimwissenschaft (Secret Science; translated as
lary, he called esoteric or true Christianity: a Chris- “Occult Science”) of 1910, which is Steiner’s most
tianity which went beyond the denominational voluminous work. It not only describes the plane-
differences and theologies of ordinary Christianity, tary evolution of the earth, but also human evolu-
of which he had been so critical. tion. This is also the book in which he fully
Together with his later second wife Marie von discusses the central importance of Christ’s death
Sivers (1867-1948), Steiner became the leader of and resurrection for both the earth and humanity.
the German Section of the Theosophical Society in It allows man to overcome and transform evil,
1902, the year in which he also publicly announced described here for the first time in its dual charac-
himself to be a theosophist. He did so by means of ter of Ahriman and Lucifer. Furthermore, ina series
a lecture on Monismus und Theosophie (Monism of lectures, such as Die Apokalypse des Johannes
and Theosophy) for the Giordano Bruno Bund, of (The Apokalypse of St. john) of 1908, Von Jesus zu

--- Page 513 ---
1089 STEINER
Christus (From Jesus to Christ) of 1911, and sev- tells the story of the antagonism between King
eral lecture series on the four gospels, Steiner pro- Solomon and Hiram, the temple architect. Steiner
vided the basis for one of his core doctrines, namely sees it in terms of the deeper division between a
his Christology. Furthermore he gave an enormous current that comes from Abel and another one that
amount of other lectures all over Europe on a wide comes from Cain; or in other words, the current of
range of topics. the priests (that according to Steiner was eventually
Besides the descriptions of the spiritual path con- represented by the shepherds present at the birth of
tained in Knowledge of the Higher Worlds and Jesus), and the current of the inventors, builders
elsewhere, that were meant for the general public, and cultivators of the earth (represented by the
Steiner also privately taught pupils in his Esoter- kings or magi who paid their homage to Jesus). In
ische Schule (Esoteric School). This school com- many ways, Jesus Christ thus reunited these two
prised three “classes”, related, respectively, to, historical currents within humanity.
imagination, inspiration and intuition. The third The period from 1910 until 1914 was a very
class, which was intended to spiritually coach peo- eventful one. Steiner wrote his four Mystery Dra-
ple in their daily, professional life, does not seem to mas (three further ones were planned, but never
have functioned, but the first two classes did. The written), which showed on stage the karmic con-
first class, active from 1904 until 1914, worked nections of an esoteric group of people and their
with spiritual exercises based on theosophical liter- evolving relations to Christ and Lucifer/Ahriman
ature such as Collins’ Light on the Path. Until over several incarnations. In these plays, Steiner
1907, this group was formally part of the Esoteric and Marie von Sivers continued an artistic impulse
School of Theosophy. However, in that year Steiner that they had already initiated at the 1907 World
decided to withdraw his “first class” from the EST Conference of the Theosophical Society in Munich,
in the wake of several scandals, the most important when they had decorated the conference room with
of which cantered around > Annie Besant’s claim occult symbols largely derived from the Rosicru-
that the Mahatmas who had appeared at > Henry cian tradition and had staged Edouard Schuré’s
Steel Olcott’s death bed had nominated her as mystery plays. This artistic impulse would find its
his successor. Annie Besant in fact agreed with culmination with the building of the Goetheanum
Steiner’s decision, but interpreted it in terms of a (initially called Johannesbau) in Dornach (Switzer-
division of labour: Steiner, who supposedly knew land) from 1913 onwards, after several attempts to
nothing about Oriental wisdom, would concen- build similar edifices in Stuttgart, Malsch and
trate on his Christian-Rosicrucian spiritual path, Munich had failed. The Goetheanum, completely
whereas Besant herself would be responsible for constructed out of wood, and one of the first exam-
the Oriental yoga-path. ples of organic architecture, was not only meant to
Steiner’s second class, active from 1906 until provide a headquarters for Steiner’s esotericism,
1914, had a more ritual and artistic, and less intel- but also to be a visible realisation of the Goe-
lectual character. Steiner adopted the Memphis- theanist ideal of a new synthesis of religion, art and
Misraim rite of John Yarker’s masonic order, of science — domains that had fallen apart in the secu-
which both he and Marie von Sivers became mem- larized, materialist western world.
bers. In this connection they had to get into contact From 1910 onwards the relations between
with Theodor Reuss (1855-1923), who would later Steiner and the leaders of the Theosophical Society,
be involved in the so-called > Ordo Templis Ori- especially Annie Besant, became more and more
entis (OTO), associated with > Aleister Crowley strained. This finally led to a break between Steiner
and centered on sexual magic. Despite many alle- and the Theosophical Society, the immediate cause
gations to the contrary, it seems that Steiner’s con- of which was the movement around Jiddu Krish-
tacts were merely formal, and occurred before the namurti and the foundation of the Order of the
somewhat adventurous OTO-affair. Likewise, Star in the East in 1910/1911, which venerated him
Steiner’s relation to > Freemasonry was a rather as the incarnation of “Maitreya the Christ” (Christ
loose one, and during the First World War Steiner and Maitreya the Buddha taken together). Initially,
even publicly accused Anglo-American masonic Steiner tried to avoid open criticism of this devel-
lodges from manipulating politics in order to gain opment, but he did start a series of lectures where
world dominance. In several lectures he describes he explained his view of the second coming of
masonic forms and rituals as dead entities, which Christ (e.g. Das Ereignis der Christus-Erscheinung
have to be resurrected from a completely new per- in der atherischen Welt: Christ’s Appearance in the
spective. For instance, Steiner gave his own inter- Etheric World, a number of separate lectures in
pretation of the masonic Tempellegende, which 1910). According to Steiner, the Second Coming

--- Page 514 ---
STEINER 1090
should be understood as the apparition of Christ in Theosophy and Knowledge of the Higher Worlds.
the etheric world, and not as a new physical incar- During the First World War, Steiner continued to
nation. From 1933 onwards, humanity would, oversee the building activities in Dornach, under-
according to Steiner, develop new organs for expe- taken by a very mixed and colourful group of local
riencing Christ in the spiritual world. By his workers and exiled anthroposophists from many
redemptive act Christ had already transformed the European countries, and to give his lectures on a
physical world and man’s physical body and hence wide range of topics. In response to the war, Steiner
he did not need to reincarnate again in a physical in these lectures intensely focused on political and
body. In this connection, Steiner also extensively social questions. Drawing from the theosophical
discussed the figure of Christian Rosencreutz and doctrine of races as well as the Romantic cultural
the Rosicrucian manifestoes of the early 17th cen- psychology of Herder and others, he devoted spe-
tury [> Rosicrucianism I]. Steiner took the biogra- cial attention to the problem of the different
phical accounts in the Fama Fraternitatis and the Volksseelen (the souls of the several European peo-
Chymische Hochzeit as largely authentic reports of ples, especially those of Mitteleuropa) and their
real occurrences. According to Steiner, Rosencreutz specific tasks. Steiner showed himself highly criti-
is the leading Master of the modern West, who will cal of President Woodrow Wilson and what he
help us find the etheric Christ. called Anglo-American dominance in general,
Steiner thus increasingly stressed his own adher- defending the position of Germany and Austria. In
ence to Western, Christian esotericism as opposed lectures, memoranda to both the Austrian and Ger-
to the orientalism of Besant c.s. At the same time, man governments (to which Steiner had access
however, he continued to pledge allegiance to theo- thanks to high-ranking anthroposophical officials),
sophical perennialism by stressing the important a book (Die Kernpunkte der sozialen Frage [The
contributions of the Vedanta tradition to the devel- Core Issues of the Social Problematic], 1919; trans-
opment of esotericism, the similarities between lated as “Towards Social Renewal: Basic Issues of
Christ and Krishna etc., in a number of lectures, the Social Questions) and a pamphlet (Aufruf an
such as Die Bhagavad Gita und die Paulusbriefe das Deutsche Volk [Appeal to the German Peo-
(The Bhagavad Gita and the Epistles of Paul, 1912- ple]), Steiner outlined his vision of a new political
1913), which followed up on earlier lecture series and social philosophy that avoids the two extremes
such as Der Orient im Lichte des Okzidents (The of capitalism and socialism. Steiner propagated
Orient in the Light of the Occident) of 1909. Nev- the so-called tri-partition of society, distinguishing
ertheless, in these lectures Steiner did present between the domain of the state or the legal sphere,
Indian spirituality as a stage of preparation for responsible only for inner and outer security; the
Christianity, and certainly not as an equally high or domain of cultural life, in which different national,
even higher form, as Besant did. In this connection, religious and other groups should freely organise
Steiner also suggested that the breathing exercises their own education and culture; and the domain of
of the yoga tradition were good for ancient In- economical life, which should be based on free
dians but nor for modern Europeans, who had to associations of producers and consumers who
follow the purely spiritual, more intellectual path coordinate needs and prices. In this way Steiner
described in Knowledge of the Higher Worlds. tried to give a new content to the slogan of the
According to Steiner, breathing exercises tie our French Revolution: liberty (cultural life), egality
souls more to our physical body, whereas we (state/legal sphere) and fraternity (economic life).
should try to liberate ourselves from it. After a The independence of cultural life from the state,
series of events in 1913, the rift between Steiner in particular, was intended as a solution for the
and Besant could no longer be repaired. Steiner’s problems of the multi-ethnic Austrian-Hungarian
group founded the Anthroposofische Gesellschaft Empire.
on 28 December 1912, which had its first official At the request of Emil Molt (1876-1936), direc-
meeting from 3 to 7 February 1913. Steiner himself tor of the Waldorf-Astoria Tobacco Factory,
did not become a member of the board of this soci- Steiner also became involved in the founding of a
ety, which used the term “anthroposophy” that he new type of school, the Waldorfschule, for which
had mentioned from time to time in his lectures. he provided the curriculum and the pedagogical
After the break, Steiner came to consistently refer philosophy. This pedagogy is based on Steiner’s
to his own esotericism as “anthroposophy”, and idea of the tri-partition of the human organism, a
increasingly used his own terminology instead of doctrine on which he had worked from 1904
the old theosophical vocabulary, which was also onwards, but which came to full blossom in this
deleted from the new editions of works such as period. Steiner divided the human organism in the

--- Page 515 ---
IO9I STELLA MATUTINA
region of the head or nervous-sense system, seat of The Waldorf Schools, bio-dynamical agriculture,
the activity of thought; the heart-lung region or the Christian Community, and anthroposophical
rhythmic system, seat of the activity of feeling; and medicine have all become worldwide movements.
the metabolic system, seat of the activity of will. Finally, before his death on 30 March 1925, Steiner
This tri-partition became the very core of Steiner’s gave a series of lectures in which he developed his
anthropology; and in many publications he traced definitive understanding of reincarnation and
what he called an occult physiology, studying the karma (Esoterische Betrachtungen karmischer
relation of the human organism to the Trinity, the Zusammenhdnge, “Esoteric Studies Concerning
celestial hierarchies, its development in life after Carmic Connections”).
death, the soul’s path through the diverse planetary Steiner’s immense oeuvre is edited in the Gesam-
regions, etc. Steiner’s educational philosophy is tausgabe, published by the Rudolf Steiner Verlag in
based on the principle that all three aspects of the Dornach (Switzerland), which is still not finished.
human organism should be harmoniously mobil- Many of his works have been translated into Eng-
ised in a child, avoiding the customary overempha- lish and are available through Rudolf Steiner Press
sis of the intellectual pole. and other publishers.
On New Year’s Eve 1922/1923 the Goetheanum
was set on fire and completely destroyed. In the Lit.: G. Ahern, Sun At Midnight: The Rudolf Steiner
final years of his life, Steiner not only drew up a Movement and the Western Esoteric Tradition, Wel-
lingborough: The Aquarian Press, 1984 @ C. Linden-
plan for a new Goetheanum built of concrete,
berg, Rudolf Steiner: Eine Biographie, Stuttgart: Verlag
which was only realised after his death, but also Freies Geistesleben, 1997 @ R. McDermott, “Rudolf
worked towards a new constitution of the Anthro- Steiner and Anthroposophy”, in: A. Faivre and J. Needle-
posophical Society, which was re-founded during man (eds.), Modern Esoteric Spirituality, New York:
the so-called Christmas Conference (Weihnacht- Crossroad, 1992, 288-310 @ R. Steiner, Mein Lebens-
stagung) of 1923. After long hesitation, Steiner gang, Dornach, 1925 (Gesamtausgabe no. 28).
decided to become the president of a society that
tried to combine external life with inner spiritual- CEES LEIJENHORST
ity, in an attempt to revitalize the academic, cul-
tural and professional domains. The heart of the Stella Matutina
new society was formed by the Freie Hochschule
fiir Geisteswissenschaft (Free Highschool of Spirit- The Order of the Stella Matutina was the largest
ual Science) which besides a general section was and most successful of the three segments into
divided into several professional sections (medi- which the > Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn
cine, physics, agriculture, education, arts etc.), divided in 1903. At the time of that division the
with the task of doing spiritual scientific research Isis-Urania Temple of the Golden Dawn remained
according to Steiner’s guidelines. Steiner thus gave in the hands of > A.E. Waite who interpreted the
a new form to his Esoteric School, again divided workings of the Order in a mystical sense, while
into three classes. He only managed to develop part those members who remained loyal to > S.L.M.
of the meditations for the first class. Mathers continued the magical tradition. The
As for the sections, Steiner developed the basics Stella Matutina followed a rather different path,
for anew medicine, based on the tri-partition of the which reflected the credulity and psychic enthusi-
human organism (Grundlegendes fiir eine Erweite- asms of its founder, Robert William Felkin (1853-
rung der Heilkunst |Foundations for an Expansion 1926), and which may best be described as the path
of Medicine] of 1925, translated as “Fundamentals of magical fantasy.
of Therapy”). He did so together with the Dutch A former medical missionary, who was then a
physician Ita Wegman, who not only became a very lecturer on tropical medicine at the Edinburgh
close collaborator but also played a vital role in the Medical School, Felkin was initiated into the
re-foundation of the Anthroposophical Society. Amen-Ra Temple of the Golden Dawn in March
Steiner moreover put down the foundations for a 1894, taking the motto of Finem Respice. His first
new, so-called bio-dynamic agriculture, based on wife entered the Order at the same time as Soror
knowledge of the spiritual, especially astrological Per Aspera ad Astra. Felkin came to believe that
[> astrology], forces operative in the earth. He fur- the Secret Chiefs of the Order — whom he referred
ther helped the founders of the Christengemein- to as the Sun Masters —- communicated with him
schaft (Christian Community), a movement for through automatic writing, and when he moved to
religious renewal that tried to reunite Catholicism London in 1896 his apparent psychic abilities im-
and Protestantism, by giving them new sacraments. pressed the more credulous of his fellow members

--- Page 516 ---
STELLA MATUTINA 1092
of the Isis-Urania Temple. In 1903 they gave their and his wife received “directions and instructions”
allegiance to Felkin and joined the newly founded from Christian Rosenkreutz in person, and that
Amoun Temple of his Stella Matutina Order. they had visited “great secret hidden Temples”,
Felkin was not the only significant member of the albeit on the astral plane. This conviction led, in
new Order. J.W. Brodie-Innes, a Scottish lawyer 1909, to a requirement that all members of the
and minor novelist, joined him in providing teach- Order sign a pledge accepting without question the
ings from the Sun Masters, and when > W.B. Yeats ‘messages and communications, the teachings and
resumed his involvement with the Golden Dawn it the rituals of the Order of the Stella Matutina’.
was within the Stella Matutina: in July 1912 Felkin Such material came largely through Felkin, his wife
approved Yeats’s advancement to the Grade of and his daughter, although by 1915 he was advis-
Theoricus Adeptus Minor. And while Waite disap- ing ‘the more clairvoyant and clairaudient’ mem-
proved of the magical emphasis of the Stella bers of the Order that they, too, might ‘get direct
Matutina, he remained on reasonably friendly instruction from C.R.C. himself .’
terms with Felkin, eventually, in April 1907, estab- Felkin’s credulity was, however, offset by his per-
lishing a concordat between their two branches of sonal integrity and his medical skill — qualities that
the Golden Dawn. Despite the significant differ- were praised by A.E. Waite, even as a final breach
ences of approach, the concordat survived for five was opened between the Stella Matutina and his
years. own branch of the Golden Dawn. The two Orders
A naive belief in both past and present Secret had co-operated in the production of printed grade
Chiefs was only one of Felkin’s many articles of rituals in 1910, but Felkin did not adhere to the
faith. He also believed that he could find them in terms of the concordat. These required him to be
the flesh, and in 1906 he made his first visit to Ger- the sole head of the Stella Matutina, and when
many in search of both living and dead adepts. Waite discovered that Felkin was maintaining the
Felkin failed to find the tomb of Christian Rosen- old system of three Chiefs the concordat came
creutz, but on a visit four years later he did meet > under severe strain. It finally broke in 1912 when
Rudolf Steiner. Their first meeting was brief, but Felkin was persuaded by Brodie-Innes that he could
Steiner impressed him greatly and Felkin believed no longer work with Waite, because Waite’s denial
that he would provide a link between the Stella of the reality of the Third Order, and thus of the
Matutina and the German adepts who had suppos- Secret Chiefs, removed legitimacy from his Order.
edly inspired the Golden Dawn. Two years later Waite closed down his Indepen-
Early in r911 Felkin sent one of his disciples, dent and Rectified Rite when his own scepticism
Neville Meakin, to receive both initiation and came into conflict with the growing credulity of the
teaching from Steiner. Meakin had been chosen on majority of his members. Many of these promptly
the advice of Ara Ben Shemesh, one of the discar- joined the Stella Matutina, and by November ro15
nate entities with whom Felkin had been commu- its numbers, which were evenly divided between
nicating on the astral plane since 1908, but men and women, had grown to eighty-three Outer
Meakin’s sudden death soon after his return to Order members and forty in the Second Order. It
England prevented him from passing on what he was now an international body, for at the end
had received from Steiner. Felkin now had no of 1912 Felkin had made an extended visit to
option but to go himself to meet Steiner once more. New Zealand and founded a new Temple, named
Accompanied by his second wife, Harriet David- Smaragdum Thalasses No. 37. This was estab-
son — his first wife had died in 1903 — Felkin went lished in a house named ‘Whare Ra’ — by which
again to Germany in 1912, and they returned home name the Temple itself came to be known — at
convinced that they had both received initiation Havelock North in Hawke’s Bay, but no satisfac-
into high Rosicrucian grades. Steiner later denied, tory explanation has ever been given for its odd,
in a conversation with A.E. Waite, that any initia- non-sequential numbering.
tion had taken place during the ceremonies that After a further visit to Germany in 1914, Felkin
Felkin and his wife observed, but he did admit to and his family moved permanently to New
teaching them a series of psychic “processes”. Zealand in 1916, but before leaving England he
These were duly incorporated into the ritual prac- revised the structure of the Stella Matutina. Felkin
tices of the Stella Matutina, but it is unlikely that remained Chief of the Order, but appointed Miss
they formed any part of the ceremony which Steiner Stoddart (Soror Het Ta) as Imperator of Amoun
attended during his visit to London later that year. Temple in his place, and founded three new Tem-
These “processes” were not the only innovations ples. These were Hermes No. 28 at Bristol, and two
made by Felkin. He was utterly convinced that he new Temples in London. One of these, Merlin, was

--- Page 517 ---
1093 SUMMIT LIGHTHOUSE
for the former members of Waite’s Independent & text removed the need to make manuscript or type-
Rectified Rite, and the other, known as The Secret script copies, and there was a brief surge in mem-
College, was restricted to freemasons who were bership of the Hermes Temple during the late
also members of the Societas Rosicruciana in 1940s. It proved, however, to be short lived and the
Anglia. This proved to be the high-water mark of Order went into its terminal decline. In 1970 the
the Stella Matutina, its subsequent history in Eng- Hermes Temple closed down, and Smaragdum
land being one of continuing decline. Thalasses entered its final decade. The Stella Matu-
In New Zealand Felkin was more successful. The tina had effectively ceased to be, but the actions of
Temple at Havelock North had a permanent vault, its most errant member were destined to give it a
through which passed a flow of new adepts, happy vicarious afterlife. During the 1970s Regardie’s rit-
to accept Felkin’s authority and eager to receive the ual texts were reprinted several times and their
teachings that came through him. The affairs of the availability led aspiring adepts to found new
Stella Matutina in England were very different. Miss Golden Dawn Temples throughout Europe and
Stoddart’s psychic visions took on a darker hue until North America. Some of these have survived into
she could see nothing but evil in the Order. Felkin the present century, continuing to work the grade
attempted to reason with her — he suggested that it ceremonies as practised in the Stella Matutina. It is
would be better to co-operate with true Rosicrucians doubtful, however, that their members appreciate
than to fear ‘imaginary black Rosicrucians’ in Ger- how much greater a debt they owe to Dr. Felkin
many or elsewhere — but her obsession grew, and she than they do to > Westcott, Mathers or Waite.
became convinced that Ara Ben Shemesh and other
astral entities were all part of an international Jew- [Francis] Israel Regardie, The Golden Dawn: An
Account ofthe Teachings, Rites and Ceremonies oftheish-Masonic conspiracy against western civilisation.
Order of the Golden Dawn, 4 vols., Chicago: Aries
Finally, in March 1923 Miss Stoddart left the ‘awful
Press, 1937-1940.
incubus’ that the Order had become for her.
By this time only the Amoun Temple remained in Lit.: Ellic Howe, The Magicians of the Golden Dawn.
London, with the Rev. A.H.E. Lee, one of Waite’s A Documentary History of a Magical Order 1887-
former members, as Imperator. Although its mem- 1923, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1972 Fran-
bership in England was much reduced the Stella cis King, Ritual Magic in England, 1887 to the Present
Day, London: Neville Spearman, 1970 @ [Christina
Matutina continued, and skilful management by
Mary Stoddart], Light-bearers of Darkness: By Inquire
his wife and daughter ensured that Felkin’s death in Within. For some Years a Ruling Chief of the Mother
December 1926 did not result in difficulties for the Temple ofthe Stella Matutina and R.R. et A.C., London:
Order. All went well until 1933 when Francis Israel Boswell, 1930.
Regardie joined the Hermes Temple in Bristol.
Regardie had received the first two grades of the ROBERT A. GILBERT
Golden Dawn in 1926 and 1927 in the Societas
Rosicruciana in America, which had incorporated Suavius, Leo > Gohory, Jacques
them in its working after the rituals were printed in
The Equinox in 1909-10. He advanced rapidly but
Sufism, Neo- > Neo-Sufism
became dissatisfied with the inadequacy of the
teachings given and the poor quality of the rituals
worked in the Temple. To save the Order from the Summit Lighthouse (Church Universal
imminent extinction which he believed it faced, and Triumphant)
Regardie decided to give to the world all that he
knew about the Golden Dawn. Between 1936 and Summit Lighthouse is the original name for an
1940 he published almost all of the Stella Matutina eclectic, > New Age religious organization that
rituals and Knowledge Lectures and such of its his- since 1974 has called itself Church Universal and
tory as he knew. The immediate reaction of the Triumphant (CUT). The group has its roots in such
Order, and of other branches of the Golden Dawn, New Age forerunner traditions as Theosophy [>
was to withdraw still further from public view. The Theosophical Society], - New Thought, the
onset of World War Two added to the Order’s trou- Arcane School [> Alice Bailey], and the Saint Ger-
bles and its activities in England were suspended main Foundation. In particular, CUT has adopted
until the war had ended. the Saint Germain Foundation’s belief in a hierar-
Paradoxically, publication of the rituals, albeit chy of spiritual masters known alternatively as the
inaccurate and incomplete, benefited the members Great White Brotherhood or the ascended masters.
of the Stella Matutina: ready access to the printed This hierarchy’s purported mission is to inspire the

--- Page 518 ---
SUMMIT LIGHTHOUSE 1094
spiritual evolution of the human race and to com- break free from the continuous round of physical
municate their esoteric teachings through carefully incarnations.
selected messengers. Theosophy, the Arcane School, Summit Lighthouse was founded by Marcus
the Saint Germain Foundation, and Summit Light- (later “Mark”) L. Prophet (1918-1973), a student
house each claim that their founders were desig- of the Saint Germain Foundation and its spin-off
nated emissaries of the Great White Brotherhood. rival, the Bridge to Freedom. The Bridge emerged
CUT also draws from New Thought and the during the late 1940s and early 1950s at a time
Saint Germain Foundation a belief in the power of when the Saint Germain Foundation was
the spoken word. New Thought teacher Emma embroiled in a prolonged lawsuit alleging mail
Curtis Hopkins (1853-1925) taught that a verbal fraud. One of the foundation’s New York mem-
affirmation using the words “I AM” — the name by bers, Geraldine Innocente (+ 1961), began receiv-
which Yahweh was revealed to Moses in the ing dictations in the r94os that she claimed
Hebrew scriptures — connects the speaker’s inten- emanated from the ascended masters. After several
tion with the Divine Self that is every human years of discreet circulation among foundation
being’s true nature. Through positive “decreeing”, members in Philadelphia and New York City, these
persons can call on the Divine Spirit to change neg- dictations were published under the pseudonym of
ative outer conditions and bring about physical, Thomas Printz in 1951. This publication and wide-
emotional, and spiritual healing. Both the Saint spread dissatisfaction among Innocente’s partisans
Germain Foundation and Summit Lighthouse with the Saint Germain Foundation led to the for-
adopted versions of decreeing, and it remains a pri- mation of the Bridge to Freedom, whose mission
mary spiritual practice for CUT members. The was to spread the message of the ascended masters
practice also resonates with various forms of as communicated through Innocente. Soon, how-
affirmation across the spectrum of American Chris- ever, other claimants to messengership for the
tianity that “claim God’s promises to believers”, ascended masters emerged. One such claimant was
from the more mainstream ministries of Kenneth Mark Prophet. Prophet at first published his mes-
Hagin, Kenneth Copeland, Robert Tilton, and sages anonymously in a monthly publication spon-
Robert Schuller, to Unity and the Church of Reli- sored by the Lighthouse of Freedom, a Bridge to
gious Science. CUT’s particular version of decree- Freedom spin-off established in Philadelphia dur-
ing remains close to that of its predecessor ing the r95os. In 1958, Prophet founded his own
movement, the Saint Germain Foundation, but dif- organization, the Summit Lighthouse, to spread
fers in the actual speaking rate utilized, which has the messages of the ascended masters in the New
increased. The overall tonal quality produced by Age. His dictations were published in the form of
this rapid-fire decreeing resembles a buzzing or small booklets entitled Pearls of Wisdom; Pearls is
humming sound that is difficult to decipher in terms still CUT’s most important publication and is avail-
of words or phrases. able in its entirety on CD ROM.
New Thought teacher Annie Rix Militz (1856- Summit Lighthouse grew very slowly during the
1924) claimed that the goal of human life was not 1960s, its membership consisting mainly of mid-
continual + reincarnation, but ascension, a spiri- dle-aged, middle-class women and men who had
tual reunion between the individual soul and the been involved with The Saint Germain Founda-
God Self in heaven. Militz taught that ascension tion, the Bridge to Freedom, or the Lighthouse of
was not the exclusive domain of Jesus, but rather Freedom. Prophet conducted classes in a hotel in
the crowning stage of human evolution, open to downtown Washington, D.C., and delivered “dic-
everyone. Summit Lighthouse adopted this teach- tations” from the ascended masters in these public
ing and postulated a tripartite being in humans that forums. He also traveled around the United States,
includes the IAM Presence (the spark of God at the visiting subscribers to the Pearls of Wisdom and
core of each person), the Christ Consciousness (the organizing study groups. During this period
mediator between the divine and the human Prophet created an organization of disciples called
worlds), and the soul (the mortal aspect of being the Keepers of the Flame Fraternity. In return for a
that is made immortal through the rite of ascen- monthly tithe, Keepers received a series of graded
sion). In CUT’s cosmology, members can achieve lessons that detailed the path of ascension, the
ascended master status after death if they faithfully practice of decreeing, the mission of the ascended
walk the path of initiation revealed through masters, and the special mission of the United
the church’s messenger, wed themselves to the States in bringing about the coming Golden Age of
Christ Consciousness, balance their karma, and freedom and spiritual illumination. Similar in con-

--- Page 519 ---
1095 SUMMIT LIGHTHOUSE
cept to the correspondence course offered by the were Climb the Highest Mountain (1972), by
Ancient and Mystical Order of Rosae Crucis Mark L. and Elizabeth Clare Prophet, and The
(AMORC) [> Rosicrucianism III], these lessons Great White Brotherhood in America (1976), by
drew upon the rich traditions of Western esoteri- Elizabeth Clare Prophet. These books acknowl-
cism and gnostic Christianity that had long been edged the movement’s roots in earlier versions of
present in the American cultic milieu. Keepers of ascended master activity, but claimed to be a fur-
the Flame members also constituted a core group of ther revelation under the direct sponsorship of the
believers that in time became the foundation for Ascended Master El Morya for the Aquarian Age.
Church Universal and Triumphant. These books and other teachings published by the
Prophet left his wife and children and married church proclaim CUT as the true church of both
Elizabeth Clare Wulf (b. 1939), a student, in 1963. Gautama Buddha and Jesus Christ, who are
Although Mark Prophet continued to deliver the revered as ascended masters of the highest order.
dictations from the ascended masters at public The publications also lay out a gnostic vision of
classes and Sunday services, he began privately to creation, postulating a Great Central Deity that
train his wife as a co-messenger. Following a move emanated from itself individual sparks which were
to Colorado Springs in mid 1966, the Summit each a perfect replica of divinity. These sparks of
Lighthouse began to attract increasing numbers of God then became entangled in matter and lost sight
counterculture youths. In time, a sizable contingent of their divine identity. The purpose of the
of these young persons were invited to move into ascended masters’ teachings is to lay out a path of
the Prophets’ large mansion and to devote their initiation whereby the human soul can be reunited
lives to the ascended masters’ work. Mark and with its eternal I AM presence and ascend to higher
Elizabeth Prophet became personal gurus for these realms. During the 1980s, in works such as The
young persons in a style similar to that of other Lost Years of Jesus and The Lost Teachings of
spiritual communities of the period. The Prophets Jesus, the church portrayed Jesus as a great teacher
continued to send out the Pearls of Wisdom and and gnostic revealer who traveled to Tibet and
hosted seasonal conclaves that brought together India before beginning his public mission in the
Keepers of the Flame and other students from West. Like other esoteric Christian groups, CUT
around the world. They also inaugurated Montes- claims that many of Jesus’ inner teachings were
sori International as an alternative educational discarded by an increasingly worldly orthodox
institution that combined secular and spiritual edu- church. Part of CUT’s mission is to make these
cation for children. Though based primarily on the inner teachings of Jesus available for present day
teachings of Maria Montessori and the ascended Christians as humanity enters a new spiritual dis-
masters, these schools drew on an eclectic mix pensation. These lost teachings include the art of
of educational theories and innovations. The spiritual healing, the use of affirmations, decrees,
Prophets instituted Ascended Master University and mantras to dispel evil conditions and the laws
(later called Summit University) in 1972 to give of karma and reincarnation.
interested students an intensive immersion in By the late 1970s, Elizabeth Clare Prophet was a
CUT’s esoteric doctrines. Students came to live at well-known figure in New Age circles. She ap-
the movement’s teaching centers, took classes, par- peared on television and radio and went on a series
ticipated in decreeing and dictation sessions, ate in of national tours billed as “Stumping for Higher
common, and came under the personal guidance of Consciousness”. Her presentations used sophisti-
the Prophets. This early vision of a New Age mys- cated visual and sound technologies and included
tery school would find its fulfillment in 1977 with public dictations and initiatory blessings using the
the inauguration of Camelot, the church’s 218-acre many jeweled rings Prophet wore. The church es-
campus on the grounds of the former Thomas poused a strong position on controversial social
Aquinas College near Malibu, California. issues, encouraging its members to speak out
When Mark Prophet died from a sudden stroke against abortion, pornography, communism, and
in 1973, Elizabeth Prophet began to put her per- terrorism. Like its predecessor The Saint Germain
sonal stamp on the movement. She renamed the Foundation, the church is unabashedly patriotic,
group Church Universal and Triumphant and continually reaffirming the special role of the
relocated to Southern California. The Summit United States in the earth’s spiritual evolution. In
Lighthouse became the official name for the organ- its sanctuaries an American flag stands among the
ization’s expanding publishing arm. various pictures and statues of Gautama Buddha,
The most important books published at this time Jesus, ~ Saint Germain, and Lord Manjushsi. In

--- Page 520 ---
SUMMIT LIGHTHOUSE 1096
spite of this strongly nationalistic subcurrent, how- CUT is gradually moving to routinize its cha-
ever, the group has never espoused versions of risma and now shares its leadership among three
British Israelism or anti-Semitism. From its earliest presidents, a board of directors, and a twenty-four
years, church members came from diverse racial, member council of elders. It is also adapting itself
national, and socio-economic backgrounds, and to entrepreneurial currents long present in the New
much of the group’s growth today is taking place in Age subculture. The church’s internal news organs
Latin America and Russia. now speak of “business plans” that provide “con-
CUT received national and international public- sistency and integration among all of the organiza-
ity during the late 1980s when it built a sophisti- tion’s products, services, and communications”,
cated network of fallout shelters beneath the and “fiscal balance”. Although Elizabeth Clare
Grand Teton mountains on its ranch property just Prophet no longer lives on the church’s ranch — she
north of Yellowstone Park in southern Montana. currently resides in Bozeman, Montana, about sev-
These shelters were constructed after the ascended enty miles away — she remains a revered figure in
masters forecast (through Prophet) a possible the movement.
nuclear exchange between the United States and
the former Soviet Union between 1989 and 1991. Mark L. Prophet & Elizabeth Clare Prophet, Climb the
Highest Mountain: The Everlasting Gospel, Colorado
Following the destruction of the Branch Davidian
Springs: The Summit Lighthouse, 1972 @ idem, Science
compound near Waco, Texas, in 1993, CUT was of the Spoken Word, Colorado Springs: The Summit
portrayed in the national media as another “Waco Lighthouse, 1974 @ Elizabeth Clare Prophet, The
waiting to happen”, and Prophet appeared fre- Great White Brotherhood in the Culture, History and
quently on such American television programs as Religion of America, Colorado Springs: Summit Uni-
Nightline, Larry King Live, and Oprah defending versity Press, 1976 @ idem, The Lost Years of Jesus,
her church’s intentions. She emphasized during Livingston, MT: Summit University Press, 1984 #
idem, The Lost Teachings ofJesus, 2 vols., Livingston,
these media appearances that her community was
MT: Summit University Press, 1986, 1988.
not an armed compound of apocalyptic extremists,
but rather a broad-based movement of well-edu- Lit.: James R. Lewis & J. Gordon Melton (eds.),
cated, patriotic men and women that posed no Church Universal and Triumphant in Scholarly Per-
threat to American society. Prophet also claimed to spective, Stanford, CA: Center for Academic Publica-
be the sole messenger for the ascended masters in tion, 1994 # David Stupple, “The ‘I Am’ Sect Today:
An Unobituary”, Journal of Popular Culture 3 (Springthe New Age, taking care to distinguish between
1975), 897-905 @ Bradley C. Whitsel, The Church
her dictations and the “channeling” and “spirit-
Universal and Triumphant: Elizabeth Clare Prophet's
ualism” of the New Age movement, which she Apocalyptic Movement, Syracuse: Syracuse University
disparaged. Press, 2003.
Following this period of intense but ultimately
failed apocalyptic expectation, the church has lost PHILLIP CHARLES LUCAS
more than one third of its membership, downsized
its staff from 600 to about 70, and begun selling Swedenborg, Emanuel, * 29.1.1688
large parcels of its Montana property to raise oper- Stockholm, + 29.3.1772 London
ating funds. In 1996, CUT’s board of directors
inaugurated a period of reconstruction and reor- 1. SCIENTIFIC PERIOD 2. SPIRITUAL CRISIS
ganization. It appointed a Belgian corporate exec- 3. VISIONARY PERIOD
utive as its president and made a concerted effort
to redirect itself away from apocalypticism and Without exception Swedenborg’s biographers
toward co-creating a golden age of spiritual illumi- see his religious crisis in mid-life as the defining
nation and self-empowerment. During 1998-1999, experience of his biography. His response to this
Prophet announced that she had suffered from crisis created his place in history. Despite consider-
epilepsy since her teen years and that she was now able achievements during the first half of his life,
the victim of Alzheimer’s disease. Prophet relin- Swedenborg is remembered as a seer, a mystic, a
quished both temporal and spiritual authority in revelator or a theosopher and not as an inventor,
the church in July 1999. CUT is now focused on the scientist, mining expert or philosopher. Clearly
electronic and print distribution of Prophet’s writ- none of the activities of this multifaceted genius
ings and the creation of New Age spiritual commu- during the first half of his life would warrant his
nities around the world. It regularly broadcasts its inclusion in this volume. And from a scientific per-
decreeing rituals and public meetings around the spective, if he is remembered at all, it is as a rather
world via the internet. minor figure on a very broad stage. While biogra-

--- Page 521 ---
1097 SWEDENBORG
phers differ as to the nature of the relationship Swedberg in 1683 came in the form of a partial
between the two phases of his life, they all interest in several iron mines. Mining was therefore
acknowledge that a profound shift took place. The not a distant echo in Swedenborg’s life, but a very
scientist and philosopher became a biblical exegete practical and vital concern. It is not surprising that
and theologian. The very public man sought in his adult life he was drawn to develop expertise
anonymity. The author of elaborately produced, in this field.
expensive and elegantly written books suddenly Emanuel was one of Jesper and Sarah Swedberg’s
shifted to publishing plain and inexpensive works nine children. The children were ennobled in 1719
in simple Latin prose. and at that time took the name of Swedenborg.
Swedenborg’s reputation and influence rests on Emanuel was third child and second son. In June of
his authorship and his claims in the eighteen reli- 1696 Swedenborg lost both his mother, Sarah, and
gious works he published between 1749 and 1771 - his older brother, Albrecht, within a ten day period
from the Arcana Coelestia (1749-1756) to Vera due to an epidemic. Swedberg married for a second
Christiana Religio (1770-1771). He published his time in 1697 to a kind and wealthy widow by the
books anonymously until 1768. It is on the title name of Sarah Bergia (1666-1720). No children
page of Amore Conjugiali that he wrote for the first were born of this marriage, but she was a warm
time, ‘Emanuel Swedenborg, a Swede’. Although and loving mother to Swedberg’s seven remaining
the modifier of his signature changed on the title children. During his early formative years Sweden-
pages of the three additional works he published, borg absorbed the religious atmosphere of his
he acknowledged authorship of all of them. How- home. In later life, he wrote in a letter to Gabriel A.
ever, his claims about his inspiration and his pur- Beyer of Goteborg, ‘From my fourth to my tenth
pose remained constant throughout the whole of year I was constantly engaged in thoughts upon
his religious corpus: he believed he was called to God, salvation, and the spiritual diseases of men’.
reveal the internal sense of the Bible and to Swedenborg matriculated at the University in
announce a new “True” Christianity. He said he 1699 at the age of eleven. Until that date, he had
was able to do this because, as he wrote in the first been tutored at home, where among other subjects
volume of the Arcana # 68, he had had direct expe- he certainly learned Latin and perhaps Hebrew.
rience of the spiritual world: vidi, audivi, sensi, ‘I At the time that Swedenborg became a student at
have seen, I have heard, I have felt’. Furthermore, Uppsala University the controversy between the
while he clearly stated in his final work, # 779, that conservative Aristotelian professors and the mod-
he was ‘called’ to write and publish, he never ernizing Cartesian ones had been decided by royal
attempted to organize a new religion. Today, how- decree (1689) in favor of the Cartesians. The caveat
ever, there are many Swedenborgian or New Church was that Lutheran theology should remain un-
(name taken from Revelation 21:2) organizations touched by the new approach. The Swedish scholar
worldwide [~ Swedenborgian Traditions]. Inge Jonsson has interpreted this as a victory for the
Aristotelians.
1. SCIENTIFIC PERIOD Nonetheless because Swedenborg chose to study
Swedenborg’s family background provided the with the Philosophy faculty, which at that time was
motivation and the models for both the scientific also the umbrella discipline for the natural sci-
and religious paths in his life, but his drive for sys- ences, he most certainly absorbed the Cartesian
temization and synthesis seems to have been his perspective. Later in life, when Swedenborg devel-
own. His father, Jesper Swedberg (1653-1735), ops his own philosophical system, he appears to
was a Lutheran priest with pietist leanings and a draw on both Aristotle and Descartes, as well as the
strong belief in the supernatural. He was ordained empirical sciences which he absorbed during his
in 1683, was elevated to Dean of the Cathedral in first trip to England.
Uppsala in 1693 and became the Bishop of Skara in During the years while Swedenborg was a stu-
1702. While involved in various Church contro- dent in Uppsala, a strong interest was evident
versies, Bishop Swedberg is remembered for his among the faculty and students in the study of
contributions to education and for the many Hebrew and its application to Rabbinical texts.
hymns that he wrote. The only direct evidence of Swedenborg’s connec-
Swedenborg’s mother, Sarah (1666-1696), was tion to this golden age of scholarship is his sig-
the modest and pious daughter of a wealthy mine nature on a thesis presented to the faculty in 1699
owner, Albrecht Behm, whose family traced its lin- by Benedict Lund written under the direction of
eage to King Gustav Vasa (1496-1560). The wealth Johan Palmroot. It was entitled: Lucos Hebraeo-
that Sarah Behm brought to her marriage to Jesper rum & Veterum Gentilium. Noting that Swedenborg

--- Page 522 ---
SWEDENBORG 1098
attended the university during this fertile period of entific knowledge and information. He also notes
Hebrew studies may be of particular interest to that he visited with Anton van Leeuwenhoek to
scholars with an interest in Swedenborg’s knowl- learn more about his pioneering work utilizing
edge of the kabbalah [> Jewish Influences]. Another a microscope. Swedenborg would later cite van
possible link between Swedenborg and esoteric Leeuwenhoek’s observations in his own anatomi-
Judaism is his uncle, Eric Benzelius, who had a deep cal studies. From Leiden Swedenborg traveled to
and abiding interest in “Orientalism”. In 1716- Utrecht and was resident in the city at the time of
1718 he published a two-volume work entitled the Peace Congress in 1713. At the conclusion of
Notitiae Litterariae which focuses on ‘Res Judaeo- the Congress, he pressed on to Paris carrying with
rum’. In Volume One, Chapter Six, he specifically him letters of introduction to important diplomatic
touches on the Kabbalah and its foremost docu- and cultural personalities.
ment the Zohar. Once settled in Paris, he first met with Abbé Jean
One year after Swedenborg graduated from the Paul Bignon (1662-1743), another correspondent
University in Uppsala, he sailed from Sweden to of Erik Benzelius and a man of great learning and
London, England: the center and frontier of natu- renown in France. Through him Swedenborg was
ral science in the 18th century. He was intent on introduced to the mathematician Paul Varignon
mastering mathematics and applied mechanics. (1654-1772) and the astronomer Phillipe de la
During his stay he developed relationships with Hire. He visited the Royal Library, attended the
some of the leading scholars in Europe, such as the public meetings of the Royal Academy of Sciences,
astronomers John Flamsteed (1646-1719) and Sir explored the bookstalls in search of works that
Edmund Halley (1656-1742). He worked for a would advance his interests, and was awed by his
while as an assistant to Flamsteed in Greenwich visit to Versailles. In fact, the gardens of Versailles
and then moved to Oxford in 1712 to learn from appear to have encouraged him to write some
Halley. He also studied the new calculus of > New- Ovidian fables that he would publish just prior to
ton, but it is unclear whether he ever met him. his return to Sweden.
It would appear that it was during his first trip Swedenborg began his journey homeward in the
to England that he read Thomas Burnet’s Telluris spring of 1714. He stopped in The Hague for sev-
Theoria Sacra (1681). Inge Jonsson sees in this eral weeks, and then went to Hanover with the
work the ‘decisive stimulus’ of Swedenborg’s cos- hope of meeting Leibniz, who was unfortunately in
mology, although he suggests that Swedenborg’s Vienna at the time. He no doubt had a letter of
effort was much broader in scope. Burnet attempted introduction from Eric Benzelius, who had met
to account for the creation of the earth, and used Leibniz in 1696. Disappointed he traveled to Ham-
the classical myth of the world egg to do so. Swe- burg and then to Swedish Pomerania. He lived for
denborg used the concept of ‘how [the earth] lay iz a time in Rostock and while there sent his brother-
ovo’ (257) in part III chapter IV of his Principia in-law, Eric Benzelius, an inventory of inventions
(1734). Swedenborg, however, does not refer to that had occurred to him during his travels. Ina let-
Burnet’s work in any of his letters to Benzelius dur- ter dated September 8, 1714 he wrote a list of four-
ing his first stay in England. teen items that include a submarine, a ‘flying
He does refer to the work of a Dr. John Wood- carriage’, a siphon, sluices, pumps, and ‘a method
ward (1665-1728) who was the author of a book of conjuring the wills and affections of men’s minds
entitled A New Theory of the Earth (1695) in by means of analysis’.
which he attempted to give scientific proof of the He moved to Greifswalde a short time later in
scriptural account of the flood. He also refers to the order to publish two works he had written during
work entitled Astronomia (1701) by David Greg- his trip abroad. It is noteworthy that both were lit-
ory M.D., a Savilian Professor of Astronomy at erary efforts and not scientific or mathematical
Oxford, and a Fellow of the Royal Society. Swe- treatises. One was a collection of poems entitled
denborg read this work during his first trip to Eng- Ludus Heliconius (1714) which he enlarged and
land, perhaps while he was resident in Oxford. reissued in Skara in 1716. The other was a collec-
Gregory’s work presents various theories of the tion of political allegories called Camena Borea
motion of the planets developed by such philoso- (2725),
phers as Kepler, Descartes, and Leibniz. Sweden- In November, while Swedenborg was engaged in
borg made extensive use of Gregory’s work in his these efforts and his usual studies, Charles XII sud-
Principia. denly arrived in Stralsund, Pomerania after a stren-
Swedenborg left England for the Continent uous and lightening quick journey from Bender,
toward the end of 1712, in pursuit of more sci- incognito and accompanied by only two compan-

--- Page 523 ---
IO99 SWEDENBORG
ions. To commemorate the Swedish King’s heroic In 1716, Polhem had been instrumental in secur-
return from five years of semi-captivity in Turkey, ing an appointment from the King for Swedenborg
and fourteen years of military adventures in East- on the Board of Mines, as an extraordinary asses-
ern Europe and Russia, Swedenborg wrote and sor. However, given the shift in the political climate
published Festivus Applausus (1714/1715). after the death of Charles XII, it was not until 1724
With the coming of the King, security in Swedish that Swedenborg was actually seated on the Board
Pomerania deteriorated and just prior to the encir- in a paid position. The Board of Mines was the
clement of Stralsund, by Danish, Saxon and Pruss- oversight agency for all the mines in Sweden. The
lan troops seeking Charles, Swedenborg managed position of assessor entailed the many administra-
to secure passage home to Sweden ona yacht. After tive, technical and judicial responsibilities neces-
a five-year journey, he arrived back at his father’s sary in dealing with Sweden’s most important
home, Brunsbo, in Skara in July of 1715. At the age industry.
of twenty-seven, finding gainful employment was In 1733, he asked for a leave of absence from the
the major task ahead of him. He had gone abroad Board in order to go abroad to publish his first
to immerse himself in the practical sciences of his major work, Opera Mineralia. He published the
day. He had dreams of using science and technol- three volumes in Dresden and Leipzig in 1734. The
ogy to modernize Sweden. There were few posi- first volume contained his cosmology, and the sec-
tions in which he could accomplish those dreams in ond and third volumes were scientific studies of
the traditional social structure of Sweden. Iron and Steel, Copper and Brass.
Upon his return home, initially Swedenborg In his cosmology he presented both a nebular
seems to have wanted some sort of academic posi- hypothesis and an intriguing atomic theory of mat-
tion, but as one was not forthcoming he turned his ter. His aim was to explain the origins of the
energy into creating another kind of position for universe using mathematical and mechanical prin-
himself. He became the editor and publisher of ciples. Put in other words, he wanted to explain the
Sweden’s first practical scientific journal called relationship between the Creator and the world of
Daedalus Hyperboreus, and published six issues creation. Starting with Descartes’ vortical theory,
between 1716 and 1718. The publication of he postulated that the mathematical point under-
Daedalus brought Swedenborg into contact with lies all natural particles, and that it follows geo-
two very significant Swedes, the inventor Christo- metrical rules. This indivisible point exists midway
pher Polhem (1661-1751) and the King, Charles between the infinite (which created it), and the
XII. Daedalus featured Polhem’s inventions, which finite world of nature (of which it is the source). It
of course pleased the inventor. A job as Polhem’s is devoid of extension and is created by motion
assistant quickly followed for Swedenborg. Early from the infinite. While not substantial, and there-
in 1716, Polhem was called to Lund by the King fore not subject to being put in motion, it contains
and he brought his assistant, Swedenborg, with him. within it a conatus or a tendency toward motion.
Swedenborg successfully organized the transport The first point stands two-faced like Janus seeing
of the King’s ships overland, to surprise the Nor- both universes simultaneously. Endowed with the
wegians at Fredrikshald, but became concerned tendency toward motion, points give rise to aggre-
about ‘intrigues’ and chose not to accompany the gates that are progressively complex. The first finite
King to the siege of the Norwegian fort. The death is created out of this process, containing two ten-
of the King on November 30, 1718 affected the dencies: one toward equilibrium and the other
Swedish nation and Swedenborg’s own fortunes. toward disequilibrium. Elementary particles there-
When Ulrika Eleonora ascended the throne, on fore are composed of both passive and active
March 17, 1719, the “Age of Freedom” came to substances.
Sweden. Two months later, on May 23, the Swed- Believing that he adequately understood how the
berg children, along with the children of other universe was created from the first natural point, in
Bishops, were ennobled by the Queen in order to another shorter work that he also published in
strengthen her hand in two houses of the Riksdag — 1734, in Dresden and Leipzig, Swedenborg raised
the Clergy and the Nobles. Swedenborg took his the question of the nature of the infinite and its
responsibilities as a member of the House of relationship to the finite. The small book is entitled
Nobles seriously and during his lifetime he wrote Prodromus Philosophiae Rationcinantis de Infi-
several memorials dealing with economic matters. nito et Causa Finali Creationis; deque Mechanismo
Modest Thought on the Fall and Rise of Swedish Operationis Animae et Corporis. Drawing on his
Money was presented in 1722, and The Balance of earlier effort in the Principia, in which he demon-
Trade was submitted in 1723. strated that the entire universe is subject to

--- Page 524 ---
SWEDENBORG IIOO
mechanical laws, in this new work he argued for this method, because he found that relying on his
the spatial extension of the soul. It was his belief own observations blinded him to the worth of the
that in this way atheism and materialism would be findings of others.
intellectually undermined. In a manuscript written in the early 1740s,
While the Principia began with acknowledge- one sees that Swedenborg indeed relied on both
ment of the creator as the first cause of creation, anatomical and philosophical insights from count-
and at the end of that work Swedenborg suggested less others, in writing the Oeconomia and Regnum
that it is to the infinite that all creation must return, Animale. The manuscript in question has come to
itis in De Infinito that he attempted to demonstrate be known as A Philosopher’s Notebook. It was
both the existence of the creator and that the cre- translated and edited by Alfred Acton and pub-
ator is the first and final cause of creation. lished in 1931 by the Swedenborg Scientific Asso-
According to Martin Lamm (1915; 2000), Swe- ciation in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. In this
denborg’s line of reasoning regarding the spatial notebook Swedenborg has copied quotations from
extension of the soul resembles that of > Henry the works of Aristotle, Plato, Rydelius, Leibniz,
More and Andreas Ridiger, among others. Lamm Malebranche, Descartes, Wolff, Grotius, Bilfingin-
indicates that Swedenborg was familiar with both ger, and Spinoza, among others. And in the quota-
More and Rudiger, and found in their work sup- tions themselves one finds the names of over one
port for his own. His familiarity with Ridiger is hundred and fifty additional philosophers and
noted in an anonymous review of the De Infinito in writers. The notebook also has several hundred
Acta Eruditorium in 1735, which contains praise citations from the Bible.
for Swedenborg’s effort ‘to explain the commerce Swedenborg commenced Regnum Animale be-
of the soul and body by means of “physical cause he was dissatisfied with his first attempt to
influx” ’. The review acknowledged, however, that find the principal cause through which the micro-
some might find this characterization of the soul cosm of the human body operated. This new effort
‘somewhat gross’. was to be a seventeen-part work, but in the end he
In De Infinito Swedenborg also found it neces- published only studies of the digestive system, the
sary to demonstrate why the role of human beings glands, the urinary system, the respiratory system,
in nature should be examined at all. An exploration and the organs of taste, smell, and touch. Left in
of the human place in creation would only be manuscript form and not published in this series
justified if human beings played a unique or dis- were studies of the remaining senses, the reproduc-
crete role in creation. He argued that since human tive system, and works entitled ‘Rational Psychol-
beings resemble nature as to their body and organs, ogy,’ and ‘The Fiber’.
or as to means, if they are undifferentiated from the It is in an effort to trace the world of cause from
rest of nature as to ends as well, then the principles the world of effect that Swedenborg elaborates his
that explain the ‘least of creation’ would likewise concept of representations and > correspondences.
explain the human — thus making any further He had begun a discussion of correspondences in a
examination of nature unnecessary. short unpublished work entitled Clavis Hierglyph-
In the same small work, Swedenborg also ica, written in 1741, and again picked up the theme
demonstrated to his own satisfaction that the in his Philosopher’s Notebook, citing such philoso-
human played a unique role in the relationship phers as Plato, Malebranche and Bilfinger. The
between the infinite and the finite, thus providing unpublished works are filled with examples, but
him with the philosophical foundation for his next finally in Regnum Animale he presents the concept
major project — the charting of the soul’s domain in of correspondences as a general principle or doc-
the human body. The focus of this great effort, to trine in which the physical world may be viewed as
which he devoted his tremendous energy over the purely symbolic of the spiritual world.
next ten years, was ‘to reveal the immortality of the
soul to the very senses’; and it resulted in two 22S TR TTUIA Tae @ -ROGSIES
works: Oeconomia Regni Animalis (Amsterdam It is during this same period, when Swedenborg
1740/1741; two volumes) and Regnum Animale was publishing what he hoped would be his mag-
(The Hague 1744/London 1745; three volumes). num opus, that he experienced his life-altering spir-
Swedenborg had published his first effort after five itual crisis. The crisis began simply enough, with
years of intense study, in which he sought to under- dreams that were sufficiently disturbing for Swe-
stand all the systems of the human body. For a time denborg to wake up and record them. He wrote
he did his own investigations, having learned dis- them down in what was originally a travel diary,
section in order to do so. But he soon abandoned begun when he left Sweden in the summer of 1743,

--- Page 525 ---
IIOL SWEDENBORG
on a journey to The Hague to publish his Regnum 3. VISIONARY PERIOD
Animale. This private journal would remain un- Swedenborg was seeking direction, and his next
published until 1859, long after Swedenborg’s effort can be viewed as an offertory to God. While
death. At that time, 99 copies were produced by still in London, early in 1745, he published the first
G.E. Klemming, entitled Swedenborgs Drommer. two parts of De Cultu et Amore Dei. It is a charm-
Altogether the journal contains 286 entries, with ing prose poem in which science and mythology are
the first ten devoted solely to observations and blended to tell the story of creation and of the life
events during his trip. It is perhaps the oldest and of the first couple in paradise. The work draws on
longest series of dreams ever recorded. Almost Swedenborg’s cosmological and_ psychological
immediately Swedenborg began to interpret his studies in the Principia and in the Soul’s Kingdom
dreams in addition to documenting them, and in series. Shortly after publishing the first two parts of
March of 1744 he instituted a dating system for De Cultu et Amore Dei, Swedenborg returned to
them. The dreams and experiences were revealing Sweden and re-immersed himself in the study of
and intense. He believed that they were communi- Hebrew in order to read the Old Testament in its
cations to him about his spiritual state of health. In original language.
one dream he is lying beside a pure woman, who he Ever since 1724, Swedenborg had faithfully
believes to be his guardian angel. He is told by her attended to his duties on the Board of Mines, and
that he smells ill. This signaled the beginning of a he had become a highly respected member. In 1747,
period marked by fierce temptations. These, at he was appointed to fill the position of President by
times, brought him to the edge of despair. It is then, unanimous vote. He declined the honor, however,
he wrote, that the real temptation began. and asked to be relieved of all his duties on the
Over time his temptations began to alternate Board so that he might devote himself to ‘an impor-
with experiences of blessedness. For example, on tant work’ which he now had in hand. That impor-
the night of April 6-7, the day after Easter, he heard tant work was the Arcana Coelestia.
a great thunder and was cast prostrate on the floor. Over the next three years Swedenborg attempted
In prayer he sensed the presence of Jesus Christ and three additional interpretations of the creation
he saw him face to face. Jesus asked him if he hada story before he published the first volume of his
clean bill of health. Swedenborg replied, ‘Lord, Arcana Coelestia in London in 1749. After De
thou knowest better than I’. ‘Well do so’, was the Cultu et Amore Dei, the second attempt was a
answer. This exchange appears to harken back small work written in 1745 entitled The History of
to an incident in Swedenborg’s youth, when he Creation as given by Moses. It is a work of only
arrived in London for the first time in the spring of forty-three numbered paragraphs and it covers
1710. The ship he sailed on was quarantined due to only the first three chapters of Genesis. The third
the presence of bubonic plague in Sweden, the attempt has been called Adversaria in Libros Vete-
country of inbarkation. London officials made it ris Testimenti or The Word Explained and was
clear that no one was to leave the ship. Nonetheless written in four volumes between 1746-1747. The
Swedenborg was enticed by young friends already fourth effort has been labeled the Index Biblicus. It
in London to come ashore. He was discovered by is a work in several volumes that has never been
the authorities and would have been hanged with- published in a critical Latin edition. A portion ofits
out some intervention on his behalf because he had contents have been taken from the manuscript,
no “clean bill of health”. translated and rearranged in a work entitled The
It is not until October that the states of tempta- Schmidius Marginalia together with The Exposi-
tion subsided, leaving Swedenborg with a deep tory Material of The Index Biblicus. It was edited
sense of peace and a feeling of innocence. Included by E.E. Iungerich and published in 1917 by the
in the entries for October 26-27 is one that con- Academy of the New Church.
tains Christ’s admonition to Swedenborg not to What is significant about these three interpreta-
undertake anything without him. Save for a few tions after De Cultu is that they document Swe-
questionably dated notes written perhaps six denborg’s unfolding understanding of the sacred
months later in May of 1745, Swedenborg’s per- story of creation, now specifically located in the
sonal dream journal comes to a close in the fall of book of Genesis, and what sources and methods he
1744. Although he continued to see the third vol- discovered were relevant in his attempt to uncover
ume of Regnum Animale through the press, after its deeper or hidden meaning. In De Cultu et
this last dream experience the larger project itself, Amore Dei, natural science provides the frame-
of which that work was only a small part, was work, and reason provides the standard of truth,
abandoned. whereas in the these next three unpublished works

--- Page 526 ---
SWEDENBORG IlToO2z
Scripture becomes the source of truth. This is clear # 508 of his last work, Vera Christiana Religio, it is
in what Swedenborg writes in # 19 of The History stated that ‘now it is permitted to enter into the
of Creation: ‘whatever does not absolutely agree mysteries of faith with understanding’. Further-
with things revealed must be pronounced wholly more he claimed that the much feared and long-
false’. awaited Last Judgment foretold in Revelation was
These works also demonstrate a dramatic in fact a spiritual event that took place in 1757. The
change in style, compared to his philosophical judgment was spiritual and not natural, according
works, and a change in terminology particularly to Swedenborg because the Word itself is internally
with reference to God, as Swedenborg attempts to and therefore essentially a document that addresses
understand his true essence. The Supreme Being of spiritual matters. ‘The new heaven and the new
De Cultu becomes Jehovah God in The History of earth’, that are to be established according to the
Creation, and God Messiah in the Adversaria and book of Revelation, is the new church, both in the
in the Index Biblicus. However, in the edited ver- heavens and on the earth. Swedenborg made clear
sion of the Index Biblicus, he also declared that in his works that the Second Coming, was now at
Jesus Christ is the very entrance to all of holy hand. It does not refer to a physical coming of the
scripture. Lord a second time, but points to the coming of
In the Arcana Coelestia, the God Messiah of the the Lord now fully revealed in the spiritual sense of
Adversaria becomes the Lord Jesus Christ, Savior the Word. The Second Coming is, therefore, a spir-
of the world. God is one, and Swedenborg rejects itual event that may now take place in the heart of
traditional understandings of the Trinity: “These every individual who acknowledges the Lord made
three Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are the three fully visible in Vera Christina Religio.
essentials of one God, and they make one as soul, Swedenborg claimed that the Judgment of Chris-
body, and operation make one in man’ (Arcana tianity resulted from the fatal separation of faith
Coelestia # 163:2). While Inge Jonsson writes that and charity within all the Christian churches of his
‘Those who want to understand the fundamentals day, which left them spiritually dead. This separa-
of his [Swedenborg’s] system should devote greater tion was the result of their longstanding and fun-
attention to his activities as a scientist than to his damental misunderstanding of the nature of the
theosophical period’ (1999, 21) the reader clearly Trinity, and thus of the act of redemption and the
will not understand the particulars of Sweden- means of salvation. If God is one in essence and
borg’s theology from his science. While his science person, and that essence is divine love and wisdom,
provides an indispensable foundation and frame- then the traditional understanding of the passion of
work for his theology, Swedenborg refined his the cross among Christians no longer makes sense.
understanding of God as well as other important Traditionally, the angry Father sent his only begot-
concepts in his study of scripture — not through his ten Son, Jesus, into the world to atone for the sins
cosmology or his physiology and psychology. of the human race by his fulfilling the law and suf-
The publication of the first of the eight volumes fering on the cross. But according to Swedenborg,
of the Arcana in London in 1749 marked the begin- in his Doctrina Hierosolymae de Domino (Amster-
ning of Swedenborg’s career as a theologian and dam 1763) ‘the Lord came into the world to subju-
revelator. In this work he gives a line-by-line and gate the hells and to glorify his human, and the
often word-by-word interpretation of the books of passion of the cross was the final combat whereby
Genesis and Exodus as well as inter-chapter mate- he fully conquered the hells and fully glorified his
rial which he claimed were drawn from his expe- human’. In Swedenborg’s understanding of the
riences in the spiritual world. During the next Trinity the Soul of the Father through the Holy
twenty-two years he published works on a wide Spirit provided Jesus with the infinite love and the
range of theological topics. divine means to subject the hells he has assumed
Although in agreement with many Christian within himself by taking on the body through
teachings and practices, Swedenborg called his the- Mary. In this way he restored human freedom in
ology a new Christianity. It contains a radical and spiritual things. The merit of Christ is not some-
rational Christian message. In the first paragraph thing that can be borrowed at the moment of death,
of the Arcana, the reader is told that ‘the mere let- but rather, is a power that everyone can call on
ter of the Word of the Old Testament . . . contains when faced with one’s own spiritual temptations in
deep secrets of heaven, and everything within it life. The Lord gives eternal spiritual life to everyone
both in general and in particular bears reference to whose choices over a life-time indicate a true desire
the Lord, to his heaven, to the church, to religious for salvation. However, for those who freely
belief, and to all things connected with them’. In choose the evil in their heart and do not seek to

--- Page 527 ---
1103 SWEDENBORG
mend their ways in life, Christ’s merit does not the progress of the fire to his dinner companions,
magically save them in death. and was relieved when the fire stopped before it
Swedenborg emphasizes in his extensive and reached his own house. The next day he was called
detailed descriptions of the spiritual world, that we to the provincial governor’s house to give a detailed
create and choose our own heaven or our own hell description of what he had seen. On July 21st a
after death. By the choices we make in life, we bring messenger arrived from Stockholm with a letter
with us the texture, color, shape, form and sub- reporting the disaster, which coincided exactly
stance of our spiritual life. For those who subdue with the account given by Swedenborg. Before long
their love of self and the world, in order to usefully the story was circulating both in Sweden and
serve the Lord and the neighbor, the joys of heav- abroad, arousing great curiosity. This and other
enly life await. For those who indulged their love of stories of Swedenborg’s extraordinary powers
self and the world and who inwardly despise the gradually led people to associate his name with the
Lord, the neighbor and useful service, a frustrating anonymous theological volumes published in Lon-
life in hell unfolds. In Swedenborg’s view true hap- don and Amsterdam.
piness abounds in heaven because life there corre- Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) was one of those
sponds to and is filled with love and wisdom from who became curious about Swedenborg because of
the Lord. The social consequences of good loves his reported clairvoyant experiences. A Fraiilein
are harmony and beauty. While those who live in von Knobloch had written to him seeking an expla-
hell may love it, the social consequences of their nation concerning the remarkable stories circulat-
evil and competing desires are constant conflict, ing about Swedenborg. After some inquiries, Kant
mutual torment, and ugliness. In the presence of wrote to her and gave her an essentially favorable
angels, hellish environments appear dark, rocky, report about Swedenborg’s character. He also pur-
and barren and smell dank and putrid. However, chased the eight volumes of the Arcana and read
because those in hell love it, it seems beautiful to them. However, in 1766 Kant published his Tratime
their mind’s eye. eines Geistersehers, a satire on Swedenborg and his
Swedenborg states that heaven is built in the spiritual experiences and philosophy, in which he
cooperative form of what he calls the “Grand criticized Swedenborg’s work as an example of the
Man”, where everyone contributes to the life of the “dreams of metaphysics” generally. Kant sent
whole, and where the whole, infused with the heat Moses Mendelsohn a copy of the book, eager for
and light of God’s love and wisdom, nurtures his comments. Mendelsohn was particularly criti-
everyone. Heaven is based on the marriage of good cal of its tone. In response Kant wrote, ‘I had to rid
and truth, and married couples form one angel and myself of my suspected knowledge of all these
together make the smallest heavenly society. Hell, anecdotes’. This was necessary, according to a
on the other hand, whether more or less diabolical, small but important scholarly tradition, because
is based upon the love of dominion. Every resident Kant feared that others would wonder whether his
in hell sees him- or herself as the center deserving own philosophy was tainted with metaphysical
all honor, all obedience, all pleasure and all things. dreams. Kant’s text was published anonymously,
Hell provides as much satisfaction as possible to but eventually his authorship became known, and
those who live there, given the fact that everyone as his fame spread in the years following, the mere
there wants, schemes, and plots to have it all alone. fact that he had critiqued Swedenborg had a detri-
Swedenborg’s theological works employ the con- mental effect on Swedenborg’s reputation.
cepts outlined above to construct a new religious Swedenborg continued to write and publish
worldview. He continued laboring to reveal its new works throughout the 1760s, traveling when
form and substance during the last third of his life. necessary to publish his works outside of Sweden,
Although he began his project in anonymity, an so as to avoid censorship. Toward the end of the
event in 1759 revealed him to be the author of these decade, two Lutheran priests in Géteborg became
strange and wonderful books. Swedenborg was convinced of the truth of the ideas they found in his
staying in Goteborg on the West Coast of Sweden books, and began to use them in their teaching at
in July, having just returned from a year-long trip to the gymnasium and in sermons. As a result, they
London where he had published five separate theo- were removed from the theological faculty, al-
logical works, including Heaven and Hell and The though they were permitted to continue teaching
Last Judgment. While dining at the home of Latin and Hebrew. In the fall of 1769, they were
William Castel on the roth, he had a clairvoyant charged with heresy, and tried before the Consis-
experience of seeing a fire raging through Stock- tory. The findings were inconclusive and the case
holm over three hundred miles away. He reported was sent to Stockholm for resolution. Although

--- Page 528 ---
SWEDENBORG 1104
there was some talk of bringing charges against (trans.), West Chester, PA: Swedenborg Foundation,
Swedenborg himself, he had many friends in the 1995; Heaven and its Wonders and Hell, Drawn from
Things Heard & Seen (New Century Edition), Georgehighest circles in Sweden, so the charges were never
E Dole (trans.), West Chester, PA: Swedenborg
brought.
Foundation, 2000 @ De Ultimo Judicio et babylonia
In July 1770, Swedenborg set sail from Sweden Destructa (4758); Last Judgment in Miscellaneous
for the last time, with his manuscript of Vera Chris- Theological Works, John Whitehead (trans.), West
tiana Religio in hand. During the next year he saw Chester, PA: Swedenborg Foundation, 1996 @ De Tel-
the work through the press in Amsterdam. Upon its luribus in Mundo Nostro Solari (1758); Earths in the
publication, he traveled to London, also for the Universe, in: Miscellaneous Theological Works, John
Whitehead (trans.), West Chester, PA: Swedenborg
last time. In December he suffered a stroke, and
Foundation, 1996 Doctrina Novae Hierosolymae de
although he partially recovered, he remained essen- Domino (1763); Doctrine of the Lord, in: Four Doc-
tially bed ridden. During this period he received trines, John FE. Potts (trans.), West Chester, PA:
word that John Wesley would like to talk with him, Swedenborg Foundation, 1997 @ Doctrina Novae
but he died on March 29, 1772, before a meeting Hierosolymae de Scriptura Sacra (1763); Doctrine of
could take place. On two occasions prior to his the Holy Scripture, in: Four Doctrines, John F. Potts
death, Swedenborg was asked whether what he (trans.), West Chester, PA: Swedenborg Foundation,
1997 @ Sapientia Angelica de Divinia Providentia
had written was true, and he is reported to have
(1763); Divine Providence, William F. Wunch (trans.),
replied, ‘I have written nothing but the truth, and West Chester, PA: Swedenborg Foundation, 1996;
could have said more, if it had been permitted’. Angelic Wisdom about Divine Providence (New Cen-
tury Edition), George F. Dole (trans.), West Chester,
E. Swedenborg, Opera Mineralia, Il & Il, Dresden & PA: Swedenborg Foundation, 2003 Sapientia Ange-
Leipzig, 1734 Principia, 1, Dresden & Leipzig, 1734; lica de divino amore et de divina sapientia (1763);
The Principia (1734), I & II, Rev. Augustus Clissold Divine Love and Wisdom, John C. Ager (trans.), West
(trans.), London: Swedenborg Association, 1846 Chester, PA: Swedenborg Foundation, 1995; Angelic
Prodromus Philosophiae Ratiocinantis de Infinito et Wisdom about Divine Love and about Divine Wisdom
Causa Finali Creationis, Dresden & Leipzig, 1734 @ (New Century Edition), George F. Dole (trans.), West
The Infinite and Final Cause of Creation (1734), J.J.G. Chester, PA: Swedenborg, 2003 @ Apocalypsis Reve-
Wilkinson (trans.), London: Swedenborg Society, 1902 lata, | & Il (1766); Apocalypse Revealed, 1 & 2, John
@ Oeconomia Regni Animalis, Amsterdam, 1740- Whitehead (trans.), West Chester, PA: Swedenborg
1741; The Economy of the Animal Kingdom, 1 & Il, Foundation, 1997 ® Delitiae Sapientiae de Amore
Rev. Augustus Clissold (trans.), New Church Press: Conjugiali (1768); Conjugial Love, Samuel M. Warren
NY reproduced by Swedenborg Scientific Association, original translator (1907), revised and edited by Louis
1955 @ Clavis Hieroglyphica, unpublished, 1741; The H. Tafel (1915), West Chester, PA: Swedenborg Foun-
Hieroglyphic Key in Psychological Transactions by dation, 1998 @ Vera Christiana Religio, 1 & 2, (1770-
Emanuel Swedenborg, Alfred Acton (trans.), Sweden- 1771); True Christian Religion, 1 & 2, John C. Ager
borg Scientific Association Philadelphia, PA, 1955 @ (trans.), West Chester, PA: Swedenborg Foundation,
Regnum Animale, The Hague and London, 1744- 1996.
1745; The Animal Kingdom, J.J.G. Wilkinson (trans.),
London: West Newbery, 1843 # De Cultu et Amore Lit.: Alfred Acton (ed.), A Philosopher’s Note Book by
Dei, London, 1745; The Worship and Love of God Emanuel Swedenborg, Philadelphia: Swedenborg Sci-
(1914), Alfred H. Stroh & Frank Sewell (trans.), entific Association, 1931 @ idem, Letters and Memori-
Jointly reprinted by West Chester, PA: Swedenborg als of Emanuel Swedenborg, vols. I & Il, Bryn Athyn:
Foundation, & London: Swedenborg Society, 1997 Swedenborg Scientific Association, 1948 @ Ernst Benz,
The History of Creation as given by Moses (unpub- Emanuel Swedenborg: Visionary Savant in the Age of
lished, 1745), Alfred Acton (trans.), Bryn Athyn, PA: Reason (German orig. 1948), West Chester: Sweden-
Academy of the New Church, 1911 Adversaria in borg Foundation, 2002 @ Lars Bergquist, Swedenborgs
Libros Veteris (unpublished, 1746-47) # The Word hemlighet: Om Ordets betydelse, dnglarnas liv och
Explained, Alfred Acton (ed. & trans.), Bryn Athyn, tjansten hos Gud — en biografi, Stockholm: Natur och
PA: Academy of the New Church, 1927 @ The Schmid- Kultur, 1999 Marguerite Beck Block, The New
ius Marginalia together with The Expository Material Church in the New World: A Study of Swedenborgian-
of the Index Biblicus (unpublished, 1746-1747), E.E. ism in America, NY: Octogon Books, 1968 @ George
Iungerich (ed. & trans.), Bryn Athyn, PA: Academy of Dole & Robert H. Kirven, A Scientist Explores Spirit,
the New Church, 1917 # Arcana Coelestia, I-VII West Chester, PA: Swedenborg Foundation, 1992 @
(1749-1756); Arcana Coelestia, 1-12, John Clowes Anders Hallengren, Gallery of Mirrors: Reflections of
original translator (1774-1806), revised and edited by Swedenborgian Thought, West Chester: Swedenborg
John FE. Potts (1905-1910), West Chester, PA: Sweden- Foundation, 1998 # Wouter J. Hanegraaff, “Sweden-
borg Foundation, 1997; Secrets of Heaven (New Cen- borg’s Magnum Opus and its Reception”, in: Swe-
tury Edition), West Chester: Swedenborg Foundation, denborg, Secrets of Heaven, o.c. @ Hans Helander,
2005- @ De Coelo et ejus Mirabilibus et de Inferno ex Emanuel Swedenborgs Ludus Heliconius and other
auditis et Visis (1758); Heaven and Hell, John C. Ager Latin Poems, Stockholm distributor for Acta Universi-

--- Page 529 ---
IIO5 SWEDENBORGIAN TRADITIONS
tatis Upsaliensis: Almquist & Wiksell International, ally calling themselves “New Church” or “Church
1995 @ Olle Hjern, Swedenborg och hans vénneri of the New Jerusalem”. Indeed, according to Swe-
Goteborg, Stockholm: Nykyrkliga Bokférlaget, 1990
denborg, the New Jerusalem of the Book of Reve-
¢ Friedemann Horn, Schelling und Swedenborg: Ein
lation means the New Church, which succeeds the Beitrag zur Problemgeschichte des deutschen Idealis-
mus und zur Geschichte Swedenborgs in Deutschland, Christian Church and is established by means of
Zurich: Swedenborg Verlag, 1954 # Inge Jonsson, Swedenborg’s revelations. Consequently, dealing
Vistonary Scientist: The Effects of Science and Philoso- with Swedenborgian traditions leads one to pay
phy on Swedenborg’s Cosmology,West Chester, PA: attention to small religious groups and a variety of
Swedenborg Foundation, 1999 Immanuel Kant, associations related to them and founded for the
Dreams of a Spirit-Seer, Illustrated by Dreams of Meta-
purpose of spreading what the Swedenborgians
physics, Emanuel F. Goerwitz (trans.), Frank Sewall
call “the Writings” (with a capital “W”), i.e. the (ed.) with an Introduction and Notes, London/NY:
Swan Sonnenschein & Co. & The Macmillian Co., theological works of Swedenborg.
1900 @ Robin Larsen, Emanuel Swedenborg: A Con- Probably the first organized effort to make those
tinuing Vision, NY: Swedenborg Foundation, 1988 works more widely known was the creation of the
Martin Lamm, Emanuel Swedenborg: The Devel- “Society for printing, publishing and circulating
opment of His Thought, Thomas Spiers & Anders the Writings of the Hon. Emanuel Swedenborg” in
Hallengren (trans.), West Chester, PA: Swedenborg
Manchester in 1782. The key figure in that under-
Foundation, 2000 @ Cyriel O. Sigstedt, The Sweden-
taking was Rev. John Clowes (1743-1831), Rector borg Epic: The Life and Works of Emanuel Sweden-
borg, London: Swedenborg Society, 1981 @ R.L. Tafel, of St. John’s Church in the same city. A minister of
Documents Concerning the Life and Character of the Church of England, Clowes remained in that
Emanuel Swedenborg, vols., 1, 2, 3, London: Sweden- ecclesiastical position to the end of his life, while
borg Society, 1875, 1890 # Wilson Van Dusen, Swe- translating many of Swedenborg’s works and
denborg’s Journal of Dreams, NY: Swedenborg openly preaching New Church doctrines from
Foundation, 1986 @ Jane Williams-Hogan, “A New
his pulpit. Clowes felt that the newly revealed
Church in a Disenchanted World: A Study of the For-
mation and Development of the General Conference of doctrines were bound to influence the existing
the New Church in Great Britain”, Ph.D. dissertation Churches and that he could use his position for
University of Pennsylvania, 1985 eadem, “Sweden- spreading them more effectively than if he would
borg the Man”, in: Erland Brock et al. (eds.), Sweden- have severed his affiliation with the Church of Eng-
borg and His Influence, Bryn Athyn, PA: Academy of land. Contrary to the path which others would fol-
the New Church, 1988, 3-27 # eadem, “The Place of low, he did not feel the need for a separate church
Emanuel Swedenborg in Modern Western Esoteri-
organization. In this way, from the very beginning
cism”, in: Antoine Faivre & Wouter J. Hanegraaff
(eds.), Western Esotericism and the Science ofReligion, of the Swedenborgian movement, there was a
Leuven: Peeters, 1998, 201-252 @ eadem, Swedenborg e “non-separatist” tendency, even if it rarely found
le Chiese Swedenborgiane, Torino: Elledici, 2004 ¢ organized expression. To this day, there are people
William R. Woofenden, Swedenborg’s Journal of who remain affiliated with other religious bodies
Dreams 1743-1744, J.J.G. Wilkinson (ed. & trans.) (or with none) while accepting Swedenborg’s mes-
from the original Swedish by G.E. Klemming, 1860,
sage entirely or in part. Interesting also was the
NY: Swedenborg Foundation, 1977 # idem, Sweden-
emphasis put from the beginning upon publishing
borg Explorer’s Guidebook: A Research Manual, West
Chester: Swedenborg Foundation, 2002 “the Writings”. Swedenborgian recordkeepers used
to be eager to proclaim impressive numbers of pub-
JANE WILLIAMS-HOGAN lished books and translations in various languages.
To a large extent, however, these numbers were not
Swedenborgian traditions the result of a heavy demand from a wide audience
(even if titles such as Heaven and Hell have always
~» Swedenborg never tried to establish any kind tended to sell quite well, due to the nature of the
of esoteric or religious organization during his life- subject), but of organized missionary efforts com-
time: what he left behind were his writings, his mes- bined with the dedication of a few, able, and perse-
sage regarding the inner meaning of the Holy vering editors and translators.
Scriptures and the coming of a new Christianity. Similar attempts to promote and distribute Swe-
However, already during his life, his work had denborg’s works took place in Scandinavia. In
found some enthusiastic readers; consequently, it is 1786, the Exegetic and Philanthropic Society was
not surprising that some of them attempted to founded in Sweden. Several of its members be-
establish groups based upon Swedenborg’s teach- longed to the nobility, and even the brother of the
ings as they understood them. The most enduring King became a member. The Society wanted to pre-
organizations have been church-like groups, usu- serve and publish Swedenborg’s writings, but the

--- Page 530 ---
SWEDENBORGIAN TRADITIONS IL06
interests of its members were not confined to Swe- observed, the familiarity with Protestant Noncon-
denborg: they were also strongly attracted to > formity played a decisive role in the emergence of
animal magnetism, and a few of them were inter- the New Church as an independent organization.
ested in > alchemy. It is striking to observe how The first General Conference took place in 1789.
Mesmerism actually had a strong influence on a The organized General Conference of the New
number of early Swedenborgians, even during the Church still exists today, along with other church
19th century. ~ Jean-Francois-Etienne Le Boys des organizations (the most important other ones
Guays (1794-1864), who became the indefatigable being headquartered in the United States). Orga-
translator and promoter of the New Church doc- nized Swedenborgianism manifests itself to this
trines in French-speaking countries, was strongly day through those religious denominations as well
involved in magnetism at the time he discovered as through associations devoted to publishing and
Swedenborg. In any case, after its initial successes, spreading the message, such as the Swedenborg
the Exegetic and Philanthropic Society had trouble, Society in London (founded in 1810) and the Swe-
due in part to the failure of the gold-making denborg Foundation in the United States (founded
schemes of some of its founders, and it was dis- in 1849 as the American Swedenborg Printing and
banded in 1789. Subsequently and in a more dis- Publishing Society, which changed to its current
crete way, another society, Pro Fide et Charitate, name in 1928).
was organized in Sweden in 1796 in order to con- While Swedenborgianism thus took the form of
tinue the publication of Swedenborg’s works. It religious denominations in the English-speaking
survived until the 1820s, and it was not before countries, ‘French and German interest in Sweden-
1871 that a New Church group was granted official borg had arisen mostly among speculative Freema-
recognition by the Swedisch government. sons and students of the occult’ (Lineham). In the
Due in part to the greater freedom granted to formative years of the Swedenborgian movement,
“non conformist” religious groups, it was not in a religious believers and seekers of a secret spiritual
Nordic country, but in the United Kingdom that the knowledge interacted quite extensively. The French
New Church as an organization was born. In 1783- ~ Illuminés d’Avignon gathered around ~ Dom
1784, a few individual readers of the writings of Antoine-Joseph Pernety (1716-1796), who trans-
Swedenborg began to meet regularly and soon took lated elegantly, but not very faithfully, some of
the name of ‘The Theosophical Society, instituted Swedenborg’s writings. In 1786, Pernety sent an
for the purpose of promoting the Heavenly Doc- emissary to the English Swedenborgians. He tried
trines of the New Jerusalem, by translating, print- to impress them, giving them to understand ‘that he
ing, and publishing the Theological Writings of and his society were in possession of some grand
the Honourable Emanuel Swedenborg’. Some of secret, which he was not then at liberty to divulge,
the people who participated in the meetings of the because the time proper for its disclosure had not
“Theosophical Society” were not satisfied with yet arrived’ (Hindmarsh). But the English Sweden-
attending religious services presided over by minis- borgians in the end were not very impressed and
ters who believed in the New Church message but the relations with the Society in Avignon were soon
remained members of the Established Church. discontinued.
These “separatists” were not convinced by the It should not be assumed that all British Sweden-
arguments of those ministers, that the “Heavenly borgians were immune to occult interests, however.
Doctrines” would in this way gradually and insen- Although the name of the distinguished soldier is
sibly permeate the Church of England. Conse- not even mentioned in Hindmarsh’s history of early
quently, they decided that it was time to establish Swedenborgianism, Lineham indicates that one of
public worship. They met in July 1787 ‘for the pur- the early members of the Society in London was
pose of forming, by the Divine Mercy of the Lord, General Charles Rainsford (1728-1809). Rains-
the New Church upon earth’ and for the first time ford was well-known for his interest in alchemy, >
celebrated Holy Supper as well as New Church Rosicrucianism and > Freemasonry, and was also
baptisms. In 1788 they opened a chapel in London the translator of at least one of > Robert Fludd’s
and adopted the denomination of “The New treatises into English. In addition, some of the
Church, signified by the New Jerusalem in the Rev- apostles of Swedenborgianism, well-known for
elation”. It is important to realize that a number of their contribution to the cause, were active Free-
participants came from Methodist or Dissenting masons. A French surgeon resident in London,
religious backgrounds. Actually, no less than six Bénédict Chastanier (1739-1816?), was among the
Methodist preachers joined the nascent New early followers who devoted much zeal to spread-
Church. As several historians have correctly ing the cause of the New Church and at the same

--- Page 531 ---
1107 SWEDENBORGIAN TRADITIONS
time made no secret of his masonic involvement. Swedenborg Rite and the Great Masonic Leaders
For a long time, there have been unconfirmed of the Eighteenth Century. The volume not only
rumours according to which, as early as 1767, claimed to summarize Swedenborg’s Masonic con-
before he left France, Chastanier had already tacts during his travel and to give indications about
formed a Lodge of “Theosophical Illuminati” (I//u- the activities of a Swedenborgian rite during the
minés théosophes), sympathetic to the ideas of the late 18th century; it also stated that, ‘[i]n the year
New Jerusalem. This would then still have been 1859, anumber of Swedenborgians who had taken
during Swedenborg’s lifetime. In October 1935, the the higher degrees were initiated into the Sweden-
magazine Theosophy presented Chastanier and his borgian degrees’ in the United States. It further
alleged Lodge as one of the precursors of > H.P. stated that the Swedenborgian Rite was now called
Blavatsky’s mission. Unless documentary evidence ‘the Primitive and Original Rite of Symbolic
appears, however, the existence of a Swedenbor- Freemasons’, consisting of six degrees. The first
gian inclined lodge at such an early period must be three were the common degrees of the York Rite,
considered with much caution and skepticism. On and the other three formed the Swedenborgian Rite
the other hand, it is true that Chastanier published proper. According to Beswick, all the higher officers
in 1787 a project for a Swedenborgian periodical of the Order were Swedenborgians, although it was
(‘Plan d’un Journal Novi-Jérusalémite’), which he also open to non members of the New Church.
addressed to ‘all the lovers of the Truth who have Beswick himself came from a Swedenborgian fam-
already tasted it in the Theological Writings of ily in the United Kingdom and was ordained a New
Emanuel Swedenborg as well as to all the Freema- Church minister in the United States, although dur-
sons who currently are seriously looking after it’. ing his life he had turbulent and tense relations with
Obviously, Chastanier saw Swedenborg’s revela- Swedenborgian religious denominations. Regard-
tions as opening the way to a deeper understanding ing the Swedenborgian Rite and its rebirth, how-
of spiritual truths. This was confirmed later in the ever, Beswick’s report seems exaggerated, as R.A.
address presenting his project, in which he stated Gilbert’s research has shown. But Beswick man-
that Freemasons only know the external symbols, aged to recruit a few members for his Swedenbor-
while Swedenborg would open to them the under- gian Rite in the United States and Canada. It also
standing of their internal meaning. spread to the United Kingdom, but ceased to exist
It is not surprising that there were other impor- in the early 2oth century, although one cannot rule
tant early followers of the doctrines of the New out the possibility of a revival somewhere in some
Jerusalem who were also Freemasons. One exam- form. The assertion by a Swedenborgian author
ple is J.P. Moét (1721-1807), Royal Librarian at that ‘the Writings [of Swedenborg] have exercised
Versailles, who was the first to translate the entire a considerable influence on that Ancient and Hon-
theological work of Swedenborg into French (part orable Fraternity’ (New Philosophy, October 1977,
of it would be published after his death). But was 148) seems overstated.
Swedenborg himself a Freemason? There have As Robert Kenneth Jones has observed, the
been authors who claim it. In its October 27, 1869 Swedenborgian movement is at variance with the
issue, the American New Church periodical, New prevailing culture, while at the same time accom-
Jerusalem Messenger, printed the translation of a modating itself to it. Due to the nature of Sweden-
document provided by a leading Freemason in borg’s ideas and to his claim to have been chosen to
Lund (Sweden), according to which Swedenborg inaugurate a new Christianity, there have always
had been initiated in London in 1706. But, as Tafel been interactions between Swedenborgians and the
observed, the problem is that Swedenborg did not “cultic milieu” (as defined by sociologist Colin
travel to England until 1710, and none of the Campbell). Not only were Swedenborgians obvi-
attempts to explain this discrepancy in the dates ously open to ideas considered as unorthodox in
has been very convincing. While claims still cir- their times, they were also deeply convinced that
culate that Swedenborg became a Freemason, no the influx of the New Dispensation would be felt
conclusive evidence has been presented that he more and more in the entire world, well beyond the
was one. borders of New Church societies (this is the so-
Of more interest to us are the later references to called “permeation theory”, which for a long time
Swedenborg in some Masonic circles. While it is remained quite popular with some sections of the
not at all clear that Chastanier practiced a Sweden- New Church). Thus they would be receptive to new
borgian rite, later there were attempts to establish trends and movements. Even if this may seem quite
such a rite. In 1870, Samuel Beswick (1822-1903) puzzling today, there was a wave of enthusiasm for
published in New York a book under the title: Fourierism in some Swedenborgian circles in the

--- Page 532 ---
SWEDENBORGIAN TRADITIONS r108
1840s. Much more of a challenge, however, was Christocentric. From the perspective of the history
the phenomenon of > Spiritualism. Since Sweden- of religions, the Swedenborgian impulse has pro-
borg had claimed to have gained access to the spir- vided elements to alternative religious strains, but
itual world, would not other people be able to do this has not prevented Swedenborg and the New
the same? Spiritualism was attractive to some Swe- Church from remaining within the sphere of Chris-
denborgians, but in the eyes of those who claimed tianity. The way in which much organized Sweden-
to be “orthodox” New Church members, it rather borgianism has tended to cling to the external
presented a serious threat. The uniqueness of Swe- forms inherited from Christian culture may consti-
denborg’s revelations could become diluted among tute a significant indication.
a proliferation of other channels; in addition, in Swedenborg can be claimed as a precursor or a
some messages allegedly received by mediums from prophet by people of diverse orientations, and his
Swedenborg himself, the latter sometimes “cor- writings can also be understood in different ways.
rected” his earlier teachings upon the basis of new However, if we examine Swedenborgian traditions
knowledge supposedly acquired after death! For in their organized and lasting forms, we encounter
instance, Swedenborg supposedly communicated primarily small religious denominations, not eso-
by automatic writing to James E. Padgett (1852- teric societies. It is true that some members of the
1923) that he —- Swedenborg — had been ‘a failure’ smallest of those denominations, The Lord’s New
because ‘I prevented, by my preconceived ideas of Church (see below), have in recent years attempted
what the truth should be, the real and pure truth to present the doctrines of the New Jerusalem as
from coming to me and thence to humanity’. Obvi- “Esoteric Christianity”. But for them, the term
ously, Padgett himself was expected to do better! “esoteric” referes to a non-literalist, or symbolic,
Such messages could hardly have delighted true approach; they do not understand it in the sense of
Swedenborgians, and many members of the New esoteric knowledge reserved for a small elite.
Church were actually quite suspicious of people According to this perspective, ‘Esoteric Christian-
claiming to communicate with the spiritual world; ity looks beyond what is external into what is inter-
in their eyes, Swedenborg’s revelations had an nal’ and ‘The theological writings of Emanuel
authority which those later “channels” could not Swedenborg are among the finest examples of Eso-
match. teric Christianity ever given to the world’. This is
In more recent years, the > New Age has been an interesting, but apparently still isolated attempt
attractive to some Swedenborgians, but it has also among New Church organizations.
led some scholars (especially German theologians) Statistically, Swedenborgianism belongs to the
to look for its roots and to conclude that Sweden- smaller traditions of Christianity, and several of its
borg played a key historical role. For instance, branches have decreased (or only experienced a
Hans-Jiirgen Ruppert has observed that Sweden- rather modest growth) over the past decades. While
borg not only influenced various figures of the New nobody knows exactly how many New Church
Age movement, but that some of his teachings cor- members there are around the world, estimates
respond more or less (according to Ruppert) to the numbering them around 30.000 worldwide seem
core idea of New Age itself: the passage from the realistic (although there are some figures going up
Christian era to a new dispensation. Thus Sweden- to 50.000 and more). The largest group of Swe-
borg provided the earliest pattern (Ur-Modell) for denborgians is currently found among black South
alternative religious groups. Similarly, British New Africans, and may be 15.000 members strong (note
Church minister Michael W. Stanley estimates that that Swedenborg’s writings took a quite positive
Swedenborg ‘should be seen as the Father of the approach toward Africans). As already mentioned,
New Age’, beyond the external appearances of the General Conference of the New Church is the
writings ‘colored by the . . . thought forms and jar- oldest existing organization, with less than 1500
gon of the eighteenth century’. This opinion is sub- members. In the United States, the Swedenborgian
ject to debate: although it cannot be denied that Church of North America (formerly called the
elements of Swedenborg’s message have become General Convention of the New Jerusalem), organ-
part of the multifaceted cultic milieu, it is some- ized in Philadelphia in 1817, currently claims
what difficult to identify Swedenborg’s specific around 2.000 members. The General Church of the
and direct influence. His name is sometimes New Jerusalem, with a worldwide membership
quoted, but mixed with many others — and mainly that is slowly increasing (now 14.000 members),
by people who obviously have never seriously read broke from the Convention in the late r9th century.
his writings. Moreover, while the New Age is post- It is headquartered in Bryn Athyn (Pennsylvania),
Christian, Swedenborg remains very strongly not far from Philadelphia, a borough which has

--- Page 533 ---
1109 SWEDENBORGIAN TRADITIONS
a majority of Swedenborgian residents and only which Swedenborg’s writings must be considered
Swedenborgian schools. The General Church al- as authoritative. This has been a question discussed
ways emphasized the importance of a distinct New since the early times of the Swedenborgian move-
Church education for the future of the movement, ment. Members of the General Conference and the
so that children could ‘be kept in the church sphere Convention usually believe that Swedenborg’s
until they can think for themselves’: ‘The true field writings contain divine truths indeed, but would
of evangelization is with the children of New not define them as an additional Scripture: the writ-
Church parents’. The smallest Swedenborgian ings illuminate and explain the meaning of the Old
denomination with headquarters in the United and New Testaments, and offer a doctrinal founda-
States, the Lord’s New Church which is the New tion for the Church. According to the beliefs of the
Jerusalem (often simply called “Nova Hieroso- General Church, however, Swedenborg’s writings
lyma”), is the result of a schism from the General are fully authoritative. Not only do they explain
Church over doctrinal issues in 1937 and has its the internal sense of the Old and New Testaments,
headquarters in Bryn Athyn as well, but it does not but they should be accepted as Sacred Scriptures
gather more than a few hundreds followers world- revealed by the Lord. Finally, the Lord’s New
wide. In addition to those main church organiza- Church considers the theological work of Sweden-
tions, there is a variety of church groups (usually borg as the Third Testament in the fullest sense of
small, except in Africa) in European countries and the word, i.e. to the extent that it contains an inter-
other parts of the world: the New Church is even nal sense which can be drawn out of it. It is a com-
present in places such as Korea, Japan and Sri plete revelation in itself, and not just the doctrine of
Lanka. Most of the groups outside of America feel the Church or the inspired explanation of the deep
a special affinity with the doctrinal orientation of meaning of the Old and New Testaments.
one of the three religious bodies headquartered in Despite differences, Swedenborgian denomina-
the United States, and sometimes get support from tions cooperate when it comes to the publication of
one of them. The story of the New Church and its Swedenborg’s writings. As already mentioned, the
pioneers in each country cannot be summarized amount of printed material published by Swe-
here — and the impact of Swedenborg’s works has denborgians has always been quite impressive
quite often gone beyond those small groups, compared to their numerical strength, and the
influencing to some extent authors, philosophers theological works of Swedenborg continue to be
or artists. Although some of them have occasion- republished, or published in new translations. For
ally misunderstood Swedenborg, they have con- instance, recently the Swedenborg Foundation has
tributed to his fame. launched a New Century Edition in English. The
The issues which led to separations among the wide circulation of those books has no doubt con-
religious bodies identifying with the New Church tributed to the impact of Swedenborg; independent
have been related to both doctrinal and organiza- of the increase or decrease of particular Sweden-
tional questions. For instance, both the General borgian groups, their continual publication will
Conference and the Swedenborgian Church (for- ensure that interest in Swedenborg can remain alive
merly General Convention) developed a structure and, perhaps, will even give rise to new branches of
of a congregational type, while the General Church the Swedenborgian tradition.
insisted upon the role of the priesthood and the
implementation of an episcopal structure. In addi- Lit.: Samuel Beswick, Swedenborg Rite and the Great
tion, while the Swedenborgian Church is a member Masonic Leaders of the Eighteenth Century, New
of an ecumenical body such as the National Coun- York: Masonic Publishing Company, 1870 # Mar-
guerite Beck Block, The New Church in the Newcil of the Churches in the U.S.A., the General
World: A Study of Swedenborgianism in America, new
Church emphasizes the distinctiveness of the New
ed., New York: Swedenborg Publishing Association,
Church, which succeeds the old Christian Church 1984 @ Dennis Duckworth, A Branching Tree: A Nar-
and has to be kept separate from it. The occasional rative History of the General Conference of the New
heated debates not only concern the structure of Church, London: General Conference of the New
the Church but also deal with some specific issues Church, 1998 @ R.A. Gilbert, “Chaos Out of Order:
of the faith. Most of these are too specific and The Rise and Fall of the Swedenborgian Rite”, Ars
Ouatuor Coronatorum 108 (1995), 122-149 @ Robert
would require too much space to be discussed here,
Hindmarsh, Rise and Progress of the New Jerusalem
but some even touch on questions such as vaccina- Church, London, 1861 @ Robert Kenneth Jones, “The
tion and other medical practices. Swedenborgians: An Interactionist Analysis”, Socio-
One of the most essential differences of opinion logical Yearbook of Religion in Britain 7, London:
among Swedenborgians concerns the extent to SCM Press, 1974, 132-135 @ Peter J. Lineham, “The

--- Page 534 ---
SWEDENBORGIAN TRADITIONS ITi1o
Origins of the New Jerusalem Church”, Bulletin ofthe images of these initial cards have been lost, and the
John Rylands University Library of Manchester 70:3 same is true of the rules of the game. The cards that
(1988), 109-122 @ Jean-Francois Mayer, La Nouvelle circulated in Germany and Italy around the begin-
Eglise de Lausanne et le mouvement swedenborgien en
ning of the 15th century bore figures reflecting the
Suisse romande, des origines 4 1948, Zurich: Sweden-
culture and social problems of the time, and they borg Verlag, 1984 idem, “War Swedenborg der
Herold des New Age?”, Offene Tore: Beitrage zu einem multiplied rapidly thanks to the progress in the art
neuen Christlichen Zeitalter 42:4 (1998), 186-199 @ of engraving; the “tarocchi” ascribed to Mantegna
M. Meillassoux-Le Cerf, Dom Pernety et les Illuminés (1460) fall into this category. Given this context,
d’Avignon, Milano: Arché/Edidit, 1992 @ Mary Ann the hypothesis according to which the tarot has an
Meyers, A New World Jerusalem: The Swedenborgian ancient Egyptian origin can be relegated to the
Experience in Community Construction, Westport/
realm of fiction. Moreover, the first elements of a
London: Greenwood Press, 1983 # Hans-Jiirgen Rup-
pert, “Swedenborg und New Age: Zu einem Ur- divinatory and esoteric interpretation of the tarot
Modell alternativer Religiositat neben den Kirchen”, do not seem to have appeared before the 18th
Materialdienst der Evangelischen Zentralstelle fiir century, particularly in France, after the number of
Weltanschauungsfragen 57:12 (1994), 353-363 cards and the figures on them had become
Karl-Erik Sjéden, Swedenborg en France, Stockholm: sufficiently standardized.
Almqvist & Wiksell, 1985 J.A.M. Snoek, “Sweden-
The so-called “Tarot of Marseille” (actually of
borg, Freemasonry, and Swedenborgian Freemasonry:
Italian origin), around which ~ Antoine Court de
An Overview”, Acta Macionica 11 (2001), 249-281 @
Michael W. Stanley, “The Relevance of Emanuel Swe- Gébelin formed his “Egyptian” interpretations in
denborg’s Theological Concepts for the New Age as It Le monde primitif (1781), has 22 cards, like all the
Is Envisioned Today”, in: Robin Larsen et al. (eds.), other games. They are known as the “major ar-
Swedenborg: A Continuing Vision, New York: Swe- cana” or as “trumps” (derived from “triumphs”),
denborg Foundation, 1988, 354-360 # R.L. Tafel, and go from “Juggler” to “Fool”, with the “Em-
Documents Concerning the Life and Character of
peror” and “Empress”, the “Hermit”, the “Pope”,
Emanuel Swedenborg, vol. 2, London: Swedenborg
the “Popess”, the “Hanged Man”, etc., in between. Society, 1877 @ Eugene Taylor, “Swedenborgianism”,
in: Timothy Miller (ed.), America’s Alternative Reli- Each card carries an inscription, a sequential num-
gions, Albany: SUNY Press, 1995, 77-85 # Lynn R. ber, and more or less fixed colors in which blue and
Wilkinson, The Dream of an Absolute Language: red predominate, though there are important vari-
Emanuel Swedenborg & French Literary Culture, ations from one game to the other. The Pope and
Albany: SUNY Press, 1996 @ Jane Williams-Hogan, the Popess are often replaced by Jupiter and Juno,
“Swedenborgian Traces in Modern Religious Move-
the Juggler by the Magus, etc. The pack is com-
ments Old and New”, in: Bertrand Ouellet & Richard
Bergeron (eds.), Croyances et Sociétés, Montréal: pleted by 56 common cards or minor arcana (53 in
Fides, 1998, 287-304 @ eadem, Swedenborge le Chiese French games), divided into four suits: Swords,
Swedenborgiane, Torino: Elledici, 2004. Cups, Wands (or Scepters), and Coins (or Penta-
cles), each numbered from 1 to ro plus the court
JEAN-FRANCOIS MAYER cards Page, Knight, Queen, and King. In English
and French the game is called tarot; in German and
Tarot Dutch Tarock or Tarok, derived from the Italian
tarocchi; Spanish has retained a name close to the
Card games in general and tarot cards in par- original, naipes.
ticular, like children’s and adult’ games, make a Court de Gébelin, in the spirit of the > Egyp-
particularly strong appeal to the symbolic > imag- tomany of his time, attributed the paternity of the
ination. Whereas the standard pack of cards has tarot to the god Thoth/Hermes [> Hermes Tris-
been able to serve as a tool for divination [> Div- megistus], interpreting the game as a hidden text, a
inatory Arts] mainly by combining the interpreta- mutus liber (silent book) similar in nature to the
tion of signs with chance procedures, tarot cards Corpus Hermeticum. This hypothesis was circu-
have added to this function the desire to tap the lated in the masonic community to which Court de
secrets of the gods, by including a system of refer- Gébelin belonged, thanks to Alliette ( Etteilla), a
ences and symbolic connections of an esoteric type, Parisian cartomancer and Grand Magus of the
correlated with the planets and the cosmic hierar- lodge of “The Perfect Initiates of Egypt”, who two
chies. The introduction of card games in Western years later published a Maniere de se récréer avec le
culture can be traced back no further than to 1375 jeu de cartes nommeées tarots (Manner of Recreat-
Florence, where Nicola della Tuccia (Chronicle of ing Oneself with the Card Game Known as Tarot;
Viterbo, 1379) ascribed to them an Oriental origin see Bibliography). Alliette here revealed the true
under their initial name, naibe. However, all the meaning of the game as a veritable synthesis of pxi-

--- Page 535 ---
PELL TAROT
mordial knowledge, thanks to some modifications predecessors, stressing the cryptic aspect of this
that he made of the figures. A secret society of the primordial revelation: a veritable Bible for the
“Interpreters of the Book of Thoth” was founded “Bohemians” and preserved in popular traditions,
in 1790. albeit confusing good and evil, the fall and “reinte-
It fell to the occultist [> occult / occultism] > gration” of man. The concordance with the
Eliphas Lévi to construct the most complete system Archéometre (1910) of > Saint-Yves d’Alveydre,
of tarot in his Dogme et rituel de la haute magie who had supposedly reconstituted the primordial
(1856), by making of divination the secret of language, showed that the universal key to sym-
secrets. His argument included a historical dimen- bolism could indeed be found in the secrets of the
sion, according to which the Ars Magna of > tarot. Some Freemasons were also concerned with
Ramon Llull had actually been a cryptic commen- the interpretation of the game; one example is
tary on the tarot. The decisive argument, for Lévi, Oswald Wirth (1860-1943), former secretary to
was provided by > Guillaume Postel, whose Clef Guaita and renovator of the symbolism of French
des choses cachées depuis la constitution du monde » Freemasonry, who published Le tarot des ima-
(Key to Things Hidden since the Constitution of giers du Moyen Age (The Tarot of the Medieval
the World, 1546) contained an illustration of a key Artists) in 1926. These speculations crossed the
ornamented with geometric designs and accom- English Channel at the end of the roth century with
panied by an inscription that could be read as > Arthur Waite, a disciple of Lévi who published
R OT A in one direction and T A R O in the other. The Pictorial Key to the Tarot in 1910, while in
These were two quite arbitrary interpretations, 1913 — P. D. Ouspensky published another study
especially since the passage of Postel concerns an of its symbolism as a “model of the universe”, in
interpolation in the Franckenberg edition (Amster- the light of oriental religions and of + Carl Gustav
dam 1646). Lévi adopted Alliette’s assertions Jung’s depth psychology. The occultist and para-
wholesale, but relativized them by claiming that masonic society of the + Hermetic Order of the
while Alliette had presented the truth, he, Lévi, had Golden Dawn played a large role here; the notes of
finally unveiled it by re-establishing the symbolic > one of its founders, > MacGregor Mathers, were
correspondences in their precise meaning. ‘The collected by Israel Regardie in a Golden Dawn
tarot, this miraculous book, inspiration of all the Tarot. But it was above all > Aleister Crowley, one
sacred books of the ancient peoples, is, because of of its most conspicuous members, who systemati-
the analogical precision of its figures and numbers, cally integrated the tarot in his magical and
the most perfect instrument of divination, which masonic speculations, with the help of > astrology
can be used with complete confidence’ (Dogme et and the kabbalah [> Jewish Influences V]. In Ma-
rituel de la haute magie, vol. 1, ch. 10). In a later gick in Theory and Practice (1930) and The Book
work, La clef des grands mystéres, Lévi analyzed of Thoth (1944), Crowley changed the names of
the symbolism of numbers with reference to the the major arcana and interpreted the trumps as
cards, but for unknown reasons stopped at 19, hieroglyphs charged with universal energy. His
although stating that the sacred language (Hebrew) tarot and that of Waite published by Rider are the
had 22 letters. The occultists followed in Lévi’s most widespread in the English-speaking world,
footsteps. > Stanislas de Guaita planned his series and are constantly reprinted.
of works forming Le serpent de la Genése (1891- One of the most remarkable examples of the
1897) in three volumes — I. Le temple de Satan, Il. tarot’s capacity to furnish a basis for esoteric and
La clefde la magie noire, III. Le probleme du mal - mystic meditation can be found in the works of >
with seven chapters in each volume in the order of Valentin Tomberg, Méditations sur les 22 arcanes
the cards (the 22nd, the World, serving as a con- majeurs du tarot (1980), prefaced in the French
clusion). Guaita was preceded by Paul Christian edition by the Catholic theologian Hans Urs von
(ps. of Christian Pitois) in L:Homme rouge des Tui- Balthasar. The latter situated the enterprise in the
leries (The Red Man of the Tuileries; 1863). > framework of “spiritual readings”, supported by
Papus (Gérard Encausse), brilliant popularizer of Christian as well as non-Christian traditions and
the great themes of fin de siécle occultism, followed by esoteric exegeses. Tomberg’s “inner experience”
with many references scattered throughout his oeu- illustrates the expansion of the field of tarot to
vre and two entire works dedicated to an interpre- embrace literature and the arts; in this context von
tive synthesis: Le tarot des Bohémiens (The Tarot Balthasar cites The Greater Trumps (1950) by
of the Bohemians/Gypsies, 1889, reissued in 1911) Charles Williams (1886-1945, a friend of T.S. Eliot
and Le tarot divinatoire (The Divinatory Tarot, and J.R.R. Tolkien). The Golem (1915) by > Gus-
1909). He reworked and classified the labors of his tav Meyrink is also based on an interpretation by

--- Page 536 ---
TAROT IrI2
means of the tarot; Jean Paulhan (1884-1968) pref- Occult Tarot, New York/London: Garland, 1992 ¢
aced Paul Marteau’s Le tarot de Marseille (The Antoine Faivre “Tarots”, in: Dictionnaire critique de
l’ésotérisme, Paris: P.U.E, 1998 @ Ronald Decker,
Tarot of Marseille, 1949).
Thierry Depaulis, Michael Dummett, A Wicked Pack
The publication of tarot packs today covers a
of Cards: the Origins of the Occult Tarot, New York:
wide cultural radius, ranging from Central Amer- Saint Martin’s Press, 1996 @ Donald Decker &
ica to Germany, and offers an amazing variety of Michael Dummett, A History of the Occult Tarot:
illustrative styles. Lady Freida Harris painted the 1870-1970, London: Duckworth, 2002.
Tarot Thoth cards after Crowley’s instructions (the
originals are at the Warburg Institute); Pamela Col- JEAN-PIERRE LAURANT
man Smith, member of the Golden Dawn, painted
those of the Rider- Waite edition. The Tarot of Xul- Templars ~ Neo-Templar Traditions
tun, painted by Peter Balin in Guatemala, combines
symbolic iconography with Indian mythology;
photographs have been used for the Tarot of Théon, Max (ps. of Louis Maximilian
Mountain Dreams (a version of Rider-Waite). Bimstein; also known as Aia Aziz),
There are tarots of advertising (Alitalia, of cubist * ca. 1848 Warsaw, t 4.3.1927
inspiration) and calendar tarots using titles of pop- Tlemcen (Algeria)
ular songs (Pop rock, New York 1972); pen and
ink designs are frequent. California has furnished Théon was Grand Master of the Exterior Circle
many versions connected with new forms of reli- of the ~ Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor (H.B. of
giosity of the > New Age type: The New Tarot for L.) around 1884, and later (about 1900) founded
the Aquarian Age, modeled after Crowley (designs the Mouvement Cosmique mainly under another
by John Cook, 1968) and the Aquarian Tarot pseudonym (Aia Aziz). Furthermore he is known as
designed in “Art Déco” style by David Mario Pal- a practitioner of occult [> occult / occultism] med-
ladini (Morgan Press, 1973). The quantity of liter- icine and adept in practical occultism, and as the
ature on the tarot is impressive: the bibliography of author of an initiatic work of over 10.000 pages
Gérard van Rijnberk (Le Tarot, 1947) contains written in collaboration with his wife, their teach-
more than a thousand titles, while a semi-exhaus- ings being known as the Philosophie Cosmique.
tive list of 1700 titles has been compiled by Stuart Little is known about Théon because of his reti-
Kaplan, The Encyclopedia of Tarot (1978-1986). cence in regard to public life, and his habit of
involving himself only from a distance in the
Court de Gébelin, Le monde primitif, Paris: chez l’au-
groups which he directed. It must be added that
teur, 1778-1782, vol. 8 @ Etteila, Maniére de se recréer
Théon himself remains the sole source for what lit- avec le jeu de cartes nommeées tarots, Amsterdam/Paris:
Pauteur, 1783-1785, in 4 parts @ Eliphas Lévi, Dogme tle we know about him.
et rituel de la haute magie, Paris: Bailliére, 1856 A Jew, and the son of a rabbi, Théon was initi-
idem, La clef des grands mysteéres, Paris: Bailliére, 1861 ated into Hasidic circles at an early age; but he is
@ Stanislas de Guaita, Le serpent de la Genése, Paris: also said to have received “oriental initiations” at a
Librarie du merveilleux, 1891-1897: A.E. Waite, The later stage, which seems to be corroborated by his
Pictorial key of the Tarot, London: Rider, 1911 @
knowledge of the Vedas and of Sanskrit. Having
P. Christian, L Homme rouge des Tuileries, Paris: au-
teur, 1863 # Oswald Wirth, Le tarot des imagiers, left Poland, he seems to have been in Paris in 1870
Paris: Nourry, 1927 @ Papus, Le tarot des Bohémiens, and in Great Britain in 1873. Using Peter Davidson
Paris: Carré, 1889 @ idem, Le tarot divinatoire, Paris: and Thomas H. Burgoyne as intermediaries, while
Librairie hermétique, 1909 @ P.D. Ouspensky, Symbol- remaining “under a veil” himself, he launched the
ism of the Tarot, London: Kegan Paul, 1938 @ Paul H.B. of L. in 1884. In 1885, in London, he married
Marteau, Le tarot de Marseille, Paris: Arts et métiers
Mary Ware (ca. 1843-1908), a poet of Irish origin
graphiques, 1949.
who, the year before, had founded the Universal
Lit.: G. van Rijnberk, Le tarot, Lyon: Derain, 1947 Philosophic Society under the pseudonym of Una.
Stuart Kaplan, The Encyclopedia of Tarot, Stamford, The “scandal” which dealt a severe blow to the
Ct: US Games Systems, vol. 1, 1978, vol. 2, New York, H.B. of L. in Great Britain obliged the couple to
1986, vol. 3, Stamford, 1990 @ Suite d’estampes de la leave London for southwest France in 1886. In
Renaissance italienne, dite Tarot de Mantegna . . . vers
1888 they settled permanently in Tlemcen where,
1645, 2 vols., Présentation d’Histoire de |’Art par
Giséle Lambert, commentaire alchimique par Frangois in semi-retreat, they cultivated an intense “psychic
Trojani, Garches (France): Arnaud Seydoux, 1985 ¢ cooperation” involving techniques of trance and
D.L. Jorgensen, The Esoteric Scene, Cultic Milieu and exteriorization aiming at the attainment of super-

--- Page 537 ---
hairs THEON
natural powers. One of Théon’s direct pupils in kabbalah [> Jewish Influences], they are quite far
practical occultism was Mirra Alfassa (1878- removed from the ideas of the occultist movements
1973), who would later become famous as “The of the end of the roth century. The Philosophie
Mother” of the Sri Aurobindo Ashram in Pon- Cosmique presents itself as non-dogmatic, aimed
dicherry and the founder of Auroville. at practical realization, and based upon the pri-
The Théons’ techniques were used by them to mordial Tradition anterior to all religions, referred
clairvoyantly explore humanity’s past, even at its to as the Tradition Cosmique. The central idea of
most distant. The result was a series of long initi- its vast and ambitious cosmogony is that the entire
atic narratives that were translated into French — cosmos is material, except the Sans Forme (Form-
sometimes poorly — by their secretary. In 1899 Max less) or Impensable (Unthinkable). The material
Théon contacted French circles of magnetisers, but world is regarded as a set of nested spheres sur-
his articles encountered the animosity of the spiri- rounding the Nucleolinus, that is, the first manifes-
tualists. In 1901 he launched the Revue Cosmique, tation (Love, Light, Life) of the Sans Forme (which
thanks to > E-Ch. Barlet (1838-1921), formerly is not referred to as God or the Absolute, because
representative of the H. B. of L. for France, almost in Our present time matter does not completely and
every article of the magazine being anonymous. freely reflect the triune manifestation). The main
The enmity of > Papus hindered the spread of the reason why his material vesture is incomplete is
movement in the French occultist world, so that the that the “Hostile one”, a being of very high origin,
Mouvement Cosmique remained confined to a very occupies the Etat nerveux (“nervous plane”, which
small public, especially after Barlet’s resignation of amounts to the astral plane of the occultists), the
his position of director in 1902. The most impor- state closer to the world of material substance
tant personalities in the group were Julien Lejay, (there are three other and more “subtle” worlds,
Louis Lemerle and Louis M. Thémanlys (1874- each with seven states or planes), and influences
1943). In 1908 the Théons came to Paris, but in the degré nerveux (“nervous degree” which corre-
september Mme Théon died in Jersey, which put an sponds to “the Vital” of “The Mother” and Sri
end to the Revue Cosmique after seven years of Aurobindo) of man, creating lack of balance on
publication. After the return of Théon to Tlemcen earth. The “Hostile One” has deprived man of his
in 1909, Thémanlys reorganized the movement “true physical body”, the immortal body of his ori-
under his direction. A new magazine, Le Mouve- gin; and the divine task of man consists, according
ment Cosmique, begun to be published in 1913. In to the Théons, in recovering this body. Attainment
1919 Théon tried to give a new impulse to the of this goal will result in physical immortality, at
movement; but he returned to Algeria a year later, least for divine humanity (for the Théons, there are
and the magazine ceased its existence in 1921. Thé- four levels of terrestrial life: mineral, vegetal, ani-
manlys continued to introduce the movement’s mal and psycho-intellectual or “human Divine”);
ideas in some artistic and literary circles; but at this victory over death will allow man to conquer
Théon’s death in 1927, its success had remained the Etat nerveux and unify the cosmos.
limited, although persons such as Claire Boas de A modern magus who appeared totally un-
Jouvenel and Marc Séménoff had become inter- adapted to the social realities of his time, Théon
ested in the group’s ideas. ended up, paradoxically, proposing a series of ideas
The influence of the Philosophie Cosmique has that are thoroughly modern: the primacy of love
hardly reached beyond France, except through and liberty, the quest for progress and individual
publications of Peter Davidson in the U.S.A. There development, the prolongation of life, mistrust of
was, however, an indirect influence in India, via political and religious ideologies (which are con-
“The Mother” and Sri Aurobindo (1872-1950), sidered to be merely masks for politics), and the
and in Russia, where the ideas of Russian Cos- absence of a division between animal and man.
mism, a broad intellectual movement based upon Despite the veil of mystery that surrounds his initi-
the teachings of Nikolai Fedorov (1828-1903); are atic path, Max Théon stands at the crossroads of
remarkably close to those of the Théons. Eastern and Western spirituality, as one of the most
According to Théon, the Mouvement Cosmique attractive figures of the movement devoted to the
was simply the continuation of the H.B. of L. under “disoccultation of the occult” (i.e., initiation by
another form. However, the teachings of the and through daily life rather than submission to the
Philosophie Cosmique seem much richer and more techniques of occult initiations, and public teach-
original than those of the H.B. of L. While inspired ings rather than secret instruction) which he tried
more particularly, although only implicitly, by the to pioneer. His work sought to demonstrate that

--- Page 538 ---
THEON I114
there need not be a contradiction between the wis- most closely associated by the general public
dom of the past and the perspectives of endless with its co-founder and leading theoretician, H.P.
progress offered to modern man. Blavatsky. Unlike other, lesser well-known organi-
zations, the Theosophical Society (Adyar) allowed
[Anonymous], La Tradition Cosmique, 6 vols., Paris: her teachings to languish for a time in the early
Bibliothéque Chacornac (vols. 1, 2) & Paris: Publica- 2oth century while under the leadership of its sec-
tions Cosmiques (vols. 3, 5, 6); Sceaux: Publications
ond President, ~ Annie Besant (1847-1933).
Cosmiques, 1962 (vol. 4) @ Max Théon, “La doctrine
spirite et l’ceuvre d’Allan Kardec”, Journal du mag- Rather than looking to Blavatsky’s teachings as the
nétisme et de la psychologie 27: 16-17 (5 & 20 octobre direct font of Wisdom, the Society’s leaders, espe-
1899), 363-406 @ Ala Aziz [ps. Max Théon], Enseigne- cially Mrs. Besant and her close associate, >
ment de la Philosophie Cosmique, Paris: Publications Charles Webster Leadbeater (1854-1934), devel-
Cosmiques, 1909 @ idem, Visions of the Eternal oped a set of teachings currently known as Second
Present (selections from the “Cosmic” works of Max
Generation Theosophy. Although the Theosophi-
Theon), Jerusalem: Argaman, 1991 @ Pascal Thé-
cal Society (Adyar) at present bases its Theosophy manlys, A Way of Meditation in the Light of Kabbalah,
Jerusalem: Argaman, 1983. primarily on Blavatsky’s interpretation, the Society
is nonetheless perceived by many within the
Lit.: Christian Chanel, De la “Fraternité Hermétique broader Theosophical Movement as more liberal
de Louxor” au “Mouvement Cosmique”: L’oeuvre de than either of the two other principal organizations
Max Théon. Contribution a létude des courants that have remained consistently faithful to her
ésotériques en Europe a la fin du XIX°” siécle et au
teachings: the Theosophical Society, with head-
début du XX°”® siécle, Paris: Doctoral thesis Ecole Pra-
quarters in Pasadena, California [henceforth tique des Hautes Etudes (Section des sciences reli-
gieuses), 1993 @ Joscelyn Godwin, Christian Chanel, identified as the Theosophical Society (Pasadena)],
John Patrick Deveney (eds.), The Hermetic Brother- and the United Lodge of Theosophists [henceforth
hood of Luxor: Historical and Initiatic Documents of identified as the ULT].
an Order of Practical Occultism, York Beach: Samuel The Theosophical Society (Adyar) claims direct
Weiser, 1995 (expanded French edition: La Fraternité
descent from the original Theosophical Society,
Hermeétique de Louxor [H.B. ofL.J]: Rituels et instruc-
which was inaugurated in New York City on
tions d’occultisme pratique, Paris: éditions Dervy,
2000). November 7, 1875. The members of this original
Society opened membership to those with varying
CHRISTIAN CHANEL backgrounds and beliefs, all united, in the words of
the Society’s own description, “by their approval of
Theosophical Society the Society’s Objects, by their wish to remove reli-
gious antagonisms and to draw together men of
I. OVERVIEW 2. ORIGINS AND THE NEW goodwill whatsoever their religious opinions, and
YORK YEARS 3. PASSAGETO INDIA 4. THE by their desire to study religious truths and to share
1880s 5. DIVISIONS AND DISSENSIONS the results of their studies with others’. In the opin-
6. THE THEOSOPHICALSOCIETY UNDER ion of the original Society, and certainly of its
ANNIE BESANT 7. THE THEOSOPHICAL descendants, Truth or Divine Wisdom (theosophia)
SOCIETY AFTER ANNIE BESANT is found, at least in part, in all religions; it thereby
accepts the expected consequence that all religions
I. OVERVIEW should be studied rather than condemned. It also
The organizations identified with the dissemina- places much emphasis on study — of Theosophy, of
tion of teachings collectively known as Theosophy religions, of philosophies, and indeed of any field
and derived primarily from the writings of > that may express the Divine Wisdom as it is under-
Helena P. Blavatsky (1831-1891) and her associ- stood by the Society and its members.
ates and followers may be referred to as Theosoph-
ical societies. The one society that has a direct or 2. ORIGINS AND THE NEw YORK
administrative link back to the first president and YEARS
co-founder of the original Theosophical Society, > The roots of the Theosophical Society may be
Henry Steel Olcott (1832-1907), is currently the found in the fascination with science and the
largest and most international of all the surviving increasingly popular view during the second half of
societies: the Theosophical Society, with head- the 19th century that the spiritual realm was sci-
quarters in Chennai (Adyar), India [henceforth entifically verifiable and that its inhabitants — spir-
identified as the Theosophical Society (Adyar) or its — were in communication with the physical
abbreviated as TS]. It is this organization that is realm. The modern spiritualist movement [-> Spir-

--- Page 539 ---
TABI THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY
itualism] was initiated in 1848 with the mysterious how involved Blavatsky was in the initial proposal
rappings in a Hydesville (New York) farmhouse. of the society. Olcott related how he wrote his sug-
The publicity surrounding these rappings excited gestion to form a society on a note that he passed
the imagination, hopes, and faith of people from all to Judge. The note was then passed to her, who
levels of society, so much so that by the 1870s ‘read it and nodded assent’.
almost twenty-five percent of the population of the It was Olcott, the newly elected President of the
U.S. claimed some manner of association with spir- TS, who voiced the purpose of the Society in his
itualism. Side by side with this popular movement inaugural address on November 17 and in its by-
there existed an esoteric tradition with long-stand- laws. The by-laws make it quite clear that the
ing antecedents in the Western world that appealed objects of the Society were ‘to collect and diffuse a
to prominent minds in philosophy and science. knowledge of the laws which govern the universe’.
Both these movements — Spiritualism and West- In his inaugural address, Olcott suggested that the
ern esotericism — were embodied in H.P. Blavatsky study of theosophy or the “Divine Science” was
by the time she arrived in New York in 1873. Her to be investigative and unbiased rather than doc-
claim to have experience in spiritualist mediumship trinal: Olcott conceived of the Society as an organ-
and in acquiring both practical and theoretical ization for research whose scope of interests
knowledge of the Western and non-Western eso- included the “unseen universe” and the powers
teric currents contributed to the creation of the therein. Both were subsumed under “magic” —
Theosophical Society in 1875. Although much is interpreted by Blavatsky, in Isis Unveiled, as “spir-
written by and about Blavatsky regarding her rea- itual Wisdom”; accordingly, “magicians” were
sons for coming to the United States (including her persons capable of causing nature to be their ser-
assertion that she did so primarily in order to estab- vant. Felt’s promise of manifesting the elementals,
lish a society that would advance esotericism or the by procedures discovered by him, was just the kind
Ancient Wisdom), there can be no doubt that her of experiment that appealed to Olcott.
primary role in the foundation of the Theosophical During these early years in New York, mediums
Society was as a charismatic raconteur who gath- were tested; experiments were conducted in psy-
ered some of the leading spiritualists and Western chometry, thought reading and mesmerism [> Ani-
esotericists in her apartment in New York City, mal Magnetism]; and papers were read. However,
where she related her adventures in search of the the TS soon proved to be more than an organiza-
Ancient Wisdom and sought to demonstrate the tion for research. For reasons never fully explained,
practical side of esotericism and > magic. On one it became a secret society in early 1876, most likely
occasion, September 7, a participant in these gath- in connection with psychic experiments, includ-
erings, George Henry Felt (1831-1906), gave a ing attempts to achieve out-of-body experiences,
lecture variously titled “The Lost Canon of Pro- which were never intended for public exposure.
portion of the Egyptians” or “The Cabala” (de- Such types of practice, clouded in > secrecy, sur-
pending upon the source summarizing the lecture). vived well into the mid-1880s. Incidentally, the
Felt suggested an explanation of the Egyptian and theoretical side of magic or “spiritual Wisdom” —
Greek Canon of Proportion, and revealed that as articulated in Blavatsky’s writings, particularly
he had discovered how to cause “elementals” or her Isis Unveiled (1877) — attracted no less an
“creatures evolved in the four kingdoms of earth, inventor than Thomas A. Edison (1847-1931),
air, fire, and water” (identified as gnomes, sylphs who applied for Fellowship status on March 27,
salamanders, and undines) to manifest. One or 1878, and was formally admitted on April 5.
both of these claims led to the suggestion by Shortly thereafter, information about a South
Colonel Olcott, only one day after Felt’s lecture, to Asian organization known as the Arya Samaj and
form a society for just this sort of study. The sug- its leader, Swami Dayanand (Svami Dayananda
gestion led to the inauguration of the Society on Sarasvati, 1824-1883) was presented to the Society
November 17. Thus, the persons directly responsi- by the head of the Bombay branch, Hurrychund
ble in forming the nascent society were Olcott, who Chintamon. The information was attractive
first suggested the idea and later contributed to its enough to cause the Council of the TS to ‘unani-
organization; Felt, who presented the lecture that mously [resolve] that the Society accept the pro-
provoked Olcott’s suggestion; and Blavatsky, who posal of the Arya Samaj to unite with itself, and
had created and sustained interest in esoteric topics that the title of the Theosophical Society be
for the participants of these soirées and who changed to the “Theosophical Society of the Arya
assented to Olcott’s suggestion that a society be Samaj”’. This association came to an end in 1882,
formed to promote occult research. It is not clear when Olcott realized that the Hindu fundamentalist

--- Page 540 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY II16
Arya Samaj had little in common with the Society’s and Its Aims”, which took place on March 17,
goals. Another initiative taken in order to expand 1879. Later in the year, Sinnett publicized their
the influence of the Society came with the forma- intention to establish a journal called The Theoso-
tion of the British Theosophical Society, which was phist, the first volume of which was published in
organized in London on June 27, 1878, by the Bombay in October 1879 and which is still pub-
Treasurer of the TS, John Storer Cobb. lished today at International Headquarters of the
Prior to Olcott’s and Blavatsky’s departure from Theosophical Society (Adyar). One reason for pub-
the U.S. in 1878, an event took place that had little lishing this journal was to provide non-Western
to do with the teachings or practices of the Society scholars with an opportunity to publish articles
but helped to identify its character. This was the about the religions of South Asia — Hinduism, Bud-
death of one Joseph Henry Louis Charles, Baron de dhism, and Zoroastrianism.
Palm, who, shortly before his death, just two Sinnett was soon to have a significant impact on
months after joining the TS on May 2oth, 1876, Theosophical teachings by engaging in alleged cor-
had requested a funeral that would ‘illustrate the respondence with two of the Mahatmas or Masters
Eastern notions of death and immortality’. This led of Wisdom that Blavatsky claimed to have had as
to considerable publicity and public interest in her teachers. These Masters were believed to be the
what was called a “Pagan funeral” by the New sources of the Ancient Wisdom and so provided
York press. Negative reactions against the Theo- the authority behind Blavatsky’s interpretation
sophical leaders caused a delay in the cremation of this Wisdom. The correspondence lasted for
service until December 1876. The cremation of approximately five years (1880-1885), with the
Baron de Palm was described by Olcott as ‘the first principal teachings summarized by Sinnett in Eso-
scientific cremation in America’ and the introduc- teric Buddhism, first published in 1883. Sinnett
tion of ‘the Hindu mode of sepulture’. was to have a significant influence — positive and
negative — on the British TS in the years following
3. PASSAGE TO INDIA these publications.
Olcott and Blavatsky’s decision to leave New
York for India came in May 1878. Prior to their 4. THE 1880S
departure, Olcott requested General Abner Dou- The Theosophical Society remained in the public
bleday (1819-1893), a prominent Civil War gen- eye due to widespread curiosity about the activities
eral who had joined the TS only as recently as June of its President (Olcott) and Corresponding Secre-
30, 1878, to be Acting President. Having departed tary (Blavatsky). In May 1880, with six additional
from New York on December 18, 1878, on New members accompanying them, they went to Ceylon
Year’s Day, Olcott and Blavatsky arrived in Eng- (Sri Lanka), to the great delight of the Sinhalese
land, where they remained for seventeen days populace. There they created new branches of the
before departing on January 17, 1879 aboard the TS and “took pdansil” or the Five Precepts cere-
ship Speke Hall. An administrative decision made mony: an act required for conversion to Buddhism.
by Olcott on the day of their departure, known as According to Olcott’s statement in his chronicle of
Foreign Order, No. 1, formally appointed Double- the early TS, Old Diary Leaves, their participation
day as President, ad interim; David A. Curtis, a in this ceremony was regarded by them not as a
journalist, as Corresponding Secretary, ad interim; conversion to Buddhism but merely as confirma-
George Valentine Maynard as Treasurer; and Wil- tion of his and Blavatsky’s status as Buddhists — an
liam Quan Judge (1851-1896) as Recording Secre- important observation, considering their earlier
tary. The journey to India lasted almost a month, connection with Buddhism, and by implication,
and Olcott and Blavatsky entered Bombay Harbor Eastern Theosophy. During this first visit to the
on February 16, 1879. island and following their confirmation as Bud-
Soon after their arrival in Bombay, on February dhists, the two initiated what Olcott called the
25, they received a letter from an individual who ‘beginning of the second and permanent stage
was to become an invaluable contact for both of the Buddhist revival begun by Megittuwatte
the travelers and the Society: the editor of the Pio- (Gunananda Mohottivatte, an activist monk who
neer (Allahabad), A.P. Sinnett (1840-1921), who organized the Society for the Propagation of Bud-
wished to make their acquaintance. The friendship dhism and a debater who often engaged in public
of the editor of a prestigious newspaper proved to debates with Christian missionaries), a movement
be a Godsend for the pair, for Sinnett helped to destined to gather the whole juvenile Sinhalese
publicize many of their activities, including Olcott’s population into Buddhist schools under our super-
first address in India, “The Theosophical Society vision...’ (Old Diary Leaves Il, 166). The out-

--- Page 541 ---
TrTy THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY
come of their activity was the establishment of the the soon-to-be-published Esoteric Buddhism (June
Buddhist Theosophical Society, which consisted of 1883), engendered considerable interest among the
seven lay branches (Kandy, Colombo, Panadure, Fellows of the London Lodge of the Theosophical
Bentota, Galle, Matarar, Welitara) and one monas- Society (the new name of the Theosophical Society
tic branch. Furthermore, a number of prominent of Great Britain as of June 1883). Esoteric Bud-
monks became members of the Society, thus estab- dhism detracted attention from Kingford’s Chris-
lishing a close relationship between the Theosoph- tian esotericism; and Sinnett was perceived by
ical Society and the Buddhist population of Ceylon. Maitland to be too much of a popularizer and pro-
This relationship was further strengthened by the pagandizer. After the book had been published,
founding, through Olcott’s efforts, of Buddhist sec- Sinnett initiated a study group in order to examine
ondary and Sunday schools, which provided an the book’s contents more carefully; and a resolu-
opportunity for Sinhalese to be exposed to Bud- tion was passed by the Lodge, advocating the study
dhist and Western education. Olcott would con- of esoteric philosophy as taught by the Masters of
tinue to actively participate in the Buddhist revival India. For Kingsford, the issue was whether only
throughout the 1880s and 1890s. the Theosophy of the Masters as represented in
Blavatsky and Olcott’s association with the Bud- Esoteric Buddhism should be studied, or whether
dhist revival in Sri Lanka and their early involvement Theosophy itself should be perceived in broader
with the Arya Samaj of Swami DayAnanda helped terms: ‘We are one at heart, for he [Sinnett] has
to create the perception that the TS was tilting been taught by his Oriental Gurus the same esoteric
more toward an Eastern philosophical perspective. doctrines which I have found under the adopted
Olcott, through his words and deeds, gave the pagan symbols of the Roman Church... Greek,
impression that the Buddhist and Hindu philoso- Hermetic, Buddhist, Vedantist, Christian — all these
phies, as he understood them, were closer to the Lodges of the Mysteries are fundamentally one and
Ancient Wisdom than was Christian Wisdom. Fur- identical in doctrine’. Yet, by the end of 1883,
thermore, Blavatsky’s anti-clerical statements made Kingsford and Maitland had come to perceive Eso-
it very clear that she had no love for the brand of teric Buddhism from a much different perspective.
Christianity that was practiced in Europe and They were sharply critical of the book and per-
evangelized in India and other parts of the colo- ceived Sinnett as a purveyor of “transcendental
nized world. Their move to India was, of course, physics” instead of esotericism. Sinnett, on the
perceived as the most blatant example of such a shift other hand, viewed Kingsford as a non-believer of
in emphasis from Western to Eastern esotericism. sorts. By April 1884, the time of the election of
It was because of this shift that, as early as 1881 officers in the Society, it was suggested (either by
or 1882, George Wyld (1821-1906), the president Kingsford or by Olcott, depending on the source)
of The British TS, became so disenchanted with the that the London Lodge organize into itself two
Theosophical leaders that he attempted to estab- branches: one to study Oriental Theosophy, the
lish — unsuccessfully —- an independent society other — which was to be called either The Hermetic
aligned with Christian rather than Buddhist or Theosophical Society or the “Hermetic Lodge,
Hindu teachings. Having failed in his attempt, T.S.” — to study Hermetic or Christian theoso-
Wyld resigned from the TS in 1882. phy. Olcott thereupon offered a charter to Mrs.
On January 3, 1883, > Anna Bonus Kingsford Kingsford to form a separate Hermetic TS; and
(1846-1888) joined the TS, and only four days after discussion with her colleague C.C. Massey
later, during the Annual General Meeting, she was (1838-1905) she accepted the offer. The “Hermetic
elected to the Presidency of the Theosophical Soci- Lodge, T.S.” was organized only two days after
ety of Great Britain (its new name). Together with elections were held for office within the London
Edward Maitland (1824-1897) as Vice-President, Lodge on April 7, 1884; these resulted in the elec-
she took immediate steps to change the direction of tion of G.B. Finch, an ally of Sinnett’s, to the office
the Society. Like Wyld before her, Kingsford — a of president and of Sinnett to that of vice-president
Roman Catholic and co-author (with Maitland) of and secretary. Many members of both the minority
The Perfect Way; or, the Finding of Christ (1882) - Kingsford-Maitland group and the Sinnett faction
attempted to focus on Catholic theosophy rather in the London Lodge desired to participate in
than the Oriental (i.e., Hindu and Buddhist) the instructions on esotericism offered by both
Theosophy of Blavatsky. Kingsford and Maitland’s branches; but they were prevented from doing so as
agenda, however, was challenged with the arrival the result of a rule issued by Olcott that disallowed
of A.P. Sinnett in England in April 1883. His dual membership in both branches. On Olcott’s
recently published book Occult World (1881) and suggestion, the charter of the Hermetic Lodge of

--- Page 542 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY r118
the TS was returned, thus making it possible for bert Stack (?-1892). It was followed by interviews
Kingsford to form an independent Hermetic Soci- with other members of the Society, including
ety | Hermeticism and Hermetic Societies], which Blavatsky. The conclusions of the first (preliminary
was inaugurated on May 9, 1884. The Hermetic and provisional) report of the SPR, issued in
Society’s stated aim was to concentrate on the December 1884, were somewhat tentative. They
study of the Hermetic teachings, the schools that acknowledged ‘a prima facie case, for some part, at
were based upon them - the Pythagorean, Platonic, least, of the claim made, which, at the point which
and Alexandrian — and the Greek Mysteries. This the investigations of the Society for Psychical
Society and its founder, Anna Kingsford, reflected Research have now reached, cannot, with consis-
an alternate path by maintaining an exclusive focus tency, be ignored’.
on Western esotericism, thus resisting the growing Two months prior to the appearance of the SPR’s
influence of Hindu and Buddhist esotericism as first report, an exposé had appeared in The Mad-
interpreted by Blavatsky. ras Christian College Magazine of September and
This resistance to the eastern Theosophy of October 1884, containing fifteen letters purport-
Blavatsky and Sinnett was also shared by Kings- edly written by Blavatsky to her housekeeper and
ford’s and Blavatsky’s mutual friend and sometime Assistant Corresponding Secretary and Librarian
Theosophist, the Countess of Caithness (7ée Maria at Adyar, Emma Coulomb. Coulomb’s husband
Mariategui, 1830-1895), who herself became Pres- (Alexis Coulomb) was a member of the Managing
ident — on June 28, 1883 — of the recently inaugu- Committee, whose duty it was to oversee the Adyar
rated Sociéte Théosophique d’Orient et d’Occident headquarters. For the background to the publica-
in Paris. In 1884, she published a work reflecting tion, one has to go back many months in time. The
the Sociéte Théosophique’s range of study, Théoso- Coulombs had both been expelled from the TS
phie universelle, the first part of which was sub- after Mme. Coulomb threatened to expose Blavat-
titled La Théosophie Chrétienne, and the second sky if she did not receive a Rs. 3000 bonus. Having
La Théosophie Bouddbhiste. been forced to leave the headquarters, she and her
This difference of opinion regarding the Ancient husband stayed in a house provided by a group
Wisdom among the leaders of the TS was nothing who published the Christian College Magazine.
compared to the uproar created by the conclusions The published letters implicated Blavatsky in a
of the Society for Psychical Research after its inves- scheme to produce fraudulent phenomena. Such
tigation of the phenomena associated with the TS. revelations convinced the SPR that further investi-
Established in 1882 ‘to examine, without prejudice gation of the TS was in order, so it dispatched one
or prepossession and in a scientific spirit those fac- of its members, Richard Hodgson (1855-1905), to
ulties of man, real or supposed, which appear to be India in November 1884, for a period of three
inexplicable on any generally recognized hypothe- months. Hodgson’s investigations caused the SPR
sis’, the SPR’s interests were similar to those that to conclude that the accusations were true, and that
inspired Olcott’s original concept of the TS. But a massive fraud was perpetrated by Blavatsky. The
whereas the SPR was involved only with the in- letters supposedly written by the Mahatmas Koot
vestigation of psychic phenomena, the TS claimed Hoomi Lal Sing and Morya had been written by
to be the fount and focus of such phenomena either Blavatsky or her Theosophical assistant and
(whether “real or supposed”, in the words of the chela (disciple), Damodar K. Mavalankar, who had
SPR). An SPR committee had been established to also arranged for the letters to be received through
investigate certain claims of the TS: the supposed the Shrine (a cabinet located in the “Occult Room”
existence of highly evolved Mahatmas or Masters, opposite Blavatsky’s bedroom at the Adyar head-
the letters they allegedly addressed to Sinnett et. al., quarters). The Mahatmas themselves were mere
and the ‘evocation of sound without physical fictions, and none of the phenomena claimed by
means’. The so-called Mahatma letters were Theosophists at Adyar could be substantiated. As
unusual not only because of their alleged author- for Blavatsky’s motive, Hodgson concluded that it
ship but because of the way they were produced. In was neither due to the ‘aloe-blossom of a woman’s
the words of the SPR Report (1885), these letters, monomania’ nor due to her desire for monetary
and other ‘ponderable objects’, were transported gain. It was his suspicion, rather, that she was a
‘through solid matter’ and appeared by means of Russian spy and that the TS was actually a political
‘precipitation of handwriting and drawings on pre- organization. This suspicion was nothing new. It
viously blank paper’. The investigation began on dated back to the time of Blavatsky and Olcott’s
the r1th of May 1884, when Olcott was inter- passage to India, at which time the British Indian
viewed by F.W.H. Myers (1843-1901) and J. Her- government became interested in her activities.

--- Page 543 ---
1119 THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY
Because of its suspicion, the government had kept exception, as was already demonstrated by the
her under surveillance during her first year in India. founding of the Hermetic Society under Anna
Hodgson concurred with the government’s suspi- Kingsford and Edward Maitland over the issue of
cions that ‘her real object has been the furtherance Christian versus Eastern Theosophy. We have seen
of Russian interests’. This second SPR Report, bet- that a similar situation arose in France: like Anna
ter known as the Hodgson Report, was issued on Kingsford, Lady Caithness was more inclined to
June 24, 1885, dealing a major blow to the credi- discuss Christian Theosophy in her works Old
bility of Blavatsky as well as of the Society. Truths in a New Light (1876) and Théosophie unt-
After leaving India for the last time in 1885, verselle (the first part entitled La Théosophie Chré-
Blavatsky eventually settled in England, where she tienne). Caithness had introduced Theosophy — in
completed her magnum opus, The Secret Doctrine, embryonic form —- in France as early as 1878,
in 1888. Just prior to its publication, she estab- according to one account, but certainly by 1883,
lished a new organization, the “Esoteric Section with the founding of La Société Théosophique
of the Theosophical Society” (ES), whose primary d’Orient et d’Occident, recognized by Olcott as an
purpose was to offer esoteric instruction. Adminis- official branch of the TS. Although Lady Caith-
tratively independent of the ES, Blavatsky in fact ness’s views of Theosophy were close to those of
acted as its leader. She was known as the Outer Blavatsky, she had an independent streak that
Head — the Inner Heads being the Mahatmas, with resulted in her resignation from the TS on at least
whom she was supposed to have direct ties. two occasions in the mid-188o0s. A person of her
When Blavatsky and Olcott left the United States talent and influence might well have separated her-
in 1878, the Society had been in a moribund state. self from the TS permanently; but unlike Kings-
While its membership grew in the following years, ford, rather than rejecting the Eastern Theosophy
especially in India, the American TS remained rela- of Sinnett and Blavatsky, she internationalized it.
tively unchanged. After Abner Doubleday’s interim The unity of French Theosophy was more seriously
Presidency, an American Board of Control was challenged by the former Theosophist > Papus
established in 1884, followed by the establishment (Gérard Encausse) who by 1891 had come to con-
of the “American Section” of the TS under its Gen- sider Blavatsky and Olcott as frauds.
eral Secretary, William Q. Judge. Judge, one of the It was not until 1895 that the TS met its most
co-founders of the TS, was to become responsible serious challenge — not in France but in the United
both for the revitalization of the Society in the States, involving the TS’s highest-ranking officials —
U.S. and the eventual separation of the American Olcott, Besant, and Judge — and its most important
Section from the parent organization. These events section — the American. In the years preceding
took place over the course of ten years, with Judge 1895, W.Q. Judge was accused of forging letters
taking on an ever-increasing role in the leadership from the Mahatmas. This charge brought an inter-
of the international Society. nal investigation by a Judicial Committee in 1893
The final significant event of the 1880s was the and 1894; it did not rule on the issue, however,
addition to the Society’s membership of one of the since it considered it out of its jurisdiction. A reso-
most prominent activists in labor activism and lution was brought by Mrs. Besant during the Soci-
Fabian socialism, > Annie Besant (1847-1933). ety’s December 1894 convention in Adyar, that
Besant’s membership was important for the pres- Judge resign his vice-presidency of the TS. He
tige and public profile of the TS, because of her refused to resign, and by February 1895 told Olcott
activism and her superior communicative skills. that he intended to withdraw from Adyar. This
She soon became Blavatsky’s key disciple in the ES, intention to withdraw from Adyar’s authority
the co-editor of Blavatsky’s magazine Lucifer, and, became a reality at the American Section’s conven-
after Blavatsky’s death, the Outer Head of the East- tion in April 1895, with the delegates voting on the
ern School of Theosophy (the new name for the proposal and appointing Judge President for life of
ES). In effect, together with Judge (who served as the “Theosophical Society in America”. This Soci-
Outer Head of the EST in America and Vice-Presi- ety continues down to the present under its current
dent of the TS) she became Blavatsky’s successor, name the Theosophical Society. It has had an
and a major interpreter of her teachings. impact on the Theosophical Movement, especially
under the activist leadership of Katherine Tingley
5. DIVISIONS AND DISSENSIONS (1847-1929), who established a well-known com-
Strong personalities and disagreements over munity and headquarters at Point Loma (San Diego,
teachings invariably lead to schisms and splits California) in 1897 and who renamed the Society
within organizations, large and small. The TS is no “The Universal Brotherhood and Theosophical

--- Page 544 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY I1I20
Society” in 1898. The Society moved from Point Hargrove’s TS, and maintaining the teachings of
Loma in 1942 and is currently headquartered in Blavatsky and Judge as its basic source of Theoso-
Pasadena, California. phy. At present, ULT lodges and study groups are
This schism would not remain the only one. found in the US, India, and Europe.
After Judge’s death in 1896, Ernest T. Hargrove Many more organizations have originated from
(t 1939) became the new President of the TS in a Theosophical society or are inspired by Theo-
America, but the true power resided in the Outer sophical teachings. When a tally was taken in
Head of the Eastern School of Theosophy. 1930, one official in the TS (Point Loma) noted that
Although the identity of the Outer Head was there were twenty-two Theosophical organiza-
unknown at the time of Hargrove’s accession to the tions. How many more have come into existence
Presidency, it was soon revealed to be Katherine since 1930 is difficult to determine.
Tingley. Because of her activism and reformism,
some members soon grew disenchanted with her 6. THE THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY
redirection of the Society. Hargrove, increasingly UNDER ANNIE BESANT
aware that his role as President was becoming inef- Following the death of Col. Olcott in 1907, the
fectual, resigned the office in 1897 and, after an Presidency of the Theosophical Society (Adyar)
unsuccessful attempt to take power during the passed to Annie Besant. Her influence prior to
1898 convention, formed his own group and held achieving this office and her association with
a convention that same year. Known as The Theo- Charles Webster Leadbeater (1854-1934) helped
sophical Society in America, with headquarters in define the course of the Society under her tenure.
New York City, and known from 1908 simply as Like Olcott, she displayed an activist role as leader
the Theosophical Society, it had attracted some of of the TS. Olcott’s activism was focused on the
Theosophy’s most informed and intellectual fol- Buddhist Revival in Sri Lanka, the Buddhist cause
lowers. Some of the best articles on Theosophy are in South-east Asia, and the establishment of the
found in its magazine, The Theosophical Quar- “Pariah schools” in India for the benefit of the
terly, which was published from 1903 to 1938. The depressed classes. Besant’s activism was more
Society as an organization has been inactive since wide-ranging, covering the areas of education, pol-
1935. itics, social reform, and the introduction of ritual as
In the same year, 1898, a second group issuing an important element of the Society’s activities. Her
from Tingley’s Universal Brotherhood and Theo- involvement with the establishment of the Central
sophical Society was founded by Dr. William H. Hindu College in Benares in 1898, together with
Dower (1866-1937) and Mrs. Francia LaDue the formation of the Home Rule League, the draft-
(1849-1922). Known as the Temple of the People, ing of the Home Rule Bill (1925), and the creation
the organization emerged from the Syracuse (New of the Theosophical Order of Service in 1908 are
York) Lodge. By 1903, the Temple’s community but a few examples of her activism. Furthermore,
and headquarters, known as Halcyon, relocated in Mrs. Besant, along with Leadbeater, were responsi-
California. The purpose of the community was to ble for introducing a new emphasis and focus
lay the ‘mental, physical, and spiritual foundations within the Theosophical framework. This was but
of the coming sixth race’, reflecting the Theosoph- the latest challenge to Blavatsky’s interpretation of
ical notion that humanity evolves through seven Theosophy, a challenge that dated back to George
major groups called Root Races. Wyld’s version of Christian Theosophy (1880),
In 1909, another organization, the United Lodge Subha Row’s (1856-1890) interpretation of East-
of Theosophists, was organized in Los Angeles by ern Theosophy based on Vedantic philosophy, and
a former member of The Universal Brotherhood the above-mentioned interpretations of Anna
and Theosophical Society and Hargrove’s Theo- Kingsford and Lady Caithness, to name but a few.
sophical Society, Robert Crosbie (1849-1919). From the mid-189o0s until well into the 2oth cen-
Although a member of Hargrove’s Society when he tury, Besant and Leadbeater were collaborating on
formed the ULT, it would appear that he reacted the study of occult phenomena, and from 1898
more against the methods and policies of Tingley, they were also investigating “Esoteric Christian-
whose organization he left in 1904. Of the two ity”. Their research was temporarily halted as a
societies, the ULT resembles Hargrove’s TS to a result of the resignation of Leadbeater from the TS
greater degree: assuming the role of anonymity on in 1906 on charges of immoral conduct — more
the part of its members, only far more strictly, specifically, pederasty. After Besant’s election as
maintaining an intellectualism similar to that of President in 1907, Leadbeater resumed his collab-

--- Page 545 ---
P20 THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY
oration with Besant. Their occult investigations the East led to a schism from Mathew’s Old Roman
resulted in a body of publications that served as the Catholic Church at the end of 1915. The Church
basis of a new and developing form of Theosophy, under Wedgwood became in effect the Theosophi-
somewhat related to the Theosophy of Blavatsky cal section of the Old Catholic Church. The schism
but containing elements that had little or nothing from Mathew’s original body was officially recog-
to do with the earlier teaching. The differences were nized on September 6, 1918, at a synod fixing the
documented by Margaret Thomas in her privately new name of Wedgwood’s Church as the Liberal
circulated booklet, Theosophy or Neo-Theosophy Catholic Church. From this time on, the Church
(1924 or 1925), which cites twenty-six areas of was to play a significant role in the TS (although
disagreement between Blavatsky’s Theosophy and having no official or administrative connection
Besant’s and Leadbeater’s “Neo-Theosophy”. Now- with it), especially in the 1920s when J. Krishna-
adays referred to as “second generation Theoso- murti was being prepared for his special role as the
phy”, it differed from the earlier teaching in four vehicle for the World Teacher, who was expected
significant ways: (1) The introduction of Catholi- soon to “take possession” of Krishnamurti’s body.
cism and its attendant sacraments into the Theo- The promotion of Krishnamurti as the vehicle of
sophical Society (Adyar), through the agency of the the World Teacher or Lord Maitreya was perhaps
Old (later Liberal) Catholic Church and through the single most important project of the TS under
the efforts of its Presiding Bishop, James Ingall Besant. Along with the discovery of the vehicle for
Wedgwood (1883-1950) and his close associate, the World Teacher came the requisite preparations
C.W. Leadbeater. (2) The claim, based on a psychic for the Teacher’s coming, including the training
reading by Leadbeater in 1909, that a young Indian and education of young Jiddu. This led to the estab-
boy, Jiddu Krishnamurti (1896-1886), would serve lishment, as already stated, of an organization
as the vehicle of the World Teacher, the Christ or whose main purpose was to promote the idea of the
Maitreya. This assertion led to the establishment, coming World Teacher: the Order of the Star in the
shortly thereafter, of an organization to promote East, founded by George Arundale (1878-1945) in
this belief, the Order of the Star in the East. (3) Banares in 191T.
Emphasis on the writings of Annie Besant and In the minds of some Theosophists, however, all
C.W. Leadbeater as the main purveyors of Theo- this was a distortion of Blavatsky’s Theosophy.
sophical teaching, to the almost total exclusion of One serious consequence was the departure from
the writings of H.P. Blavatsky. (4) Emphasis on the the Society of the influential General Secretary of
acquisition and practice of psychic or occult pow- the German Section, > Rudolf Steiner (1861-1925),
ers rather than on the theoretical understanding of who took with him fifty-five of the sixty-nine Ger-
the occult. man lodges under his leadership. A new society, the
The Liberal Catholic Church, an organization Anthroposophical Society [> Anthroposophy],
that was to become an important ally of the TS, has was established under his leadership in early 1913.
its roots in the Old Catholic Church in Holland, an Moreover, within the Theosophical Society itself
independent organization that separated from the there existed a sizable minority of members who
Pope in Rome in 1702. This Dutch Church spread opposed the “post-millenarianism” of Mrs. Besant.
to Great Britain with the consecration of Arnold It resulted in a “Back to Blavatsky” movement, first
Harris Mathew (1852-1919) as Old Catholic mentioned in the November 14, 1917 issue of a
Bishop for England on April 28, 1908. By 1915, fairly well known publication devoted to prison
most of the clergy in the Church were members of reform and Theosophical matters, the O.E. Lib-
the TS and the Order of the Star in the East, includ- rary Critic. Its editor, Henry Newlin Stokes (1859-
ing its future leader, Bishop Wedgwood, and Lead- 1942), used this phrase to refer first to the writings
beater, whom Wedgwood consecrated as Bishop on by H.P. Blavatsky and to Theosophical literature
July 22, 1916. Although Theosophists were associ- faithful to her teachings, expanding it later to in-
ated with various elements of the Old Catholic clude those Theosophical lodges within the TS and
Church, it was Wedgwood who was largely independent Theosophical groups that remained
responsible for introducing Theosophical teach- faithful to her teachings. The most important such
ings into Church doctrine and for making the group within the Society was the Theosophical
Church into a vehicle for the coming World Society Loyalty League, established in Sydney, Aus-
Teacher, Lord Maitreya. Archbishop Mathew’s tralia in 1921. Its organ, Dawn, published articles
demand that Wedgwood and his fellow Theo- from November 1, 1921, to November 1, 1924,
sophists resign from the TS and Order of the Star in emphasizing what it perceived as the pernicious

--- Page 546 ---
THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY LI22
infiltration of the Liberal Catholic Church within jadasa displayed a distinctly scholarly bent in his
the Society. publications. Furthermore, in order to carry out
Despite the activities of the Back to Blavatsky the third object of the Society (“To investigate
movement and the TS Loyalty League, the mil- unexplained laws of nature and the powers latent
lenarian fervor surrounding Krishnamurti and the in man”), he inaugurated in 1949 the School of the
World Teacher continued unabated throughout the Wisdom at the International Headquarters at
19208. Indeed, Mrs. Besant confidently declared in Adyar, on the anniversary date of the TS’s own
1927 that the World Teacher had already arrived. inauguration, November 17.
On August 3, 1929, however, Krishnamurti him- Jinarajadasa was succeeded by N. Sri Ram (pres-
self, after some years of increasing doubt about the ident from 1953-1973) — who was responsible for
claims made by Mrs. Besant and her followers, building the current Adyar Library building — John
rejected his role as the vehicle of the World Teacher S. Coats (president from 1973-1979) , and the pres-
and dissolved the Order of the Star (as it was called ent International President of the TS, Radha
at the time of its dissolution). He continued, how- Burnier (1980-present).
ever, as a teacher and educator outside the Theo- The Theosophical Society currently focuses on
sophical fold, eventually becoming one of the educational and welfare activities. These include
better-known popular philosophers of the zoth The Olcott Educational Society, which controls
century. The TS, on the other hand, suffered a The Olcott Memorial School and Olcott Memorial
significant drop in its membership and popularity. High School; the Social Welfare Centre, which
cares for infants of working mothers in the vicinity
7. THE THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY of the Headquarters; the Animal Welfare Centre;
AFTER ANNIE BESANT the Vocational Training Centre for Women; and
Mrs. Besant never fully recovered from the shock the Besant Scout Camping Centre. The TS’s pri-
of Krishnamurti’s abandonment of his Messianic mary activity, however, is the dissemination of
role. After her death in 1933, she was succeeded by Theosophical teaching, not only those of Blavatsky
George Arundale (president from 1934-1945), but also those of a number of Theosophical writers
who was an activist like Mrs. Besant, but focused after her.
on the needs of the TS itself rather than on external
activities such as had been pursued by both Olcott Lit.: Anon., Transactions ofthe Blavatsky Lodge ofthe
Theosophical Society, Los Angeles: The Theosophyand Besant. Examples are the establishment of the
Company, 1923 (repr. from the original edition, 1890
Besant Educational Trust and Besant Memorial
and 1891; compiled from notes taken at the meetings
School in Adyar in 1934, whose main purpose was of the Blavatsky Lodge of the Theosophical Society,
to provide Theosophical education; and the foun- from January roth to June 2oth, 1889) # Anon., The
dation in 1936, by Dr. Arundale’s wife Srimati Theosophical Movement 1875-1950, Los Angeles: The
Rukmini Devi (1904-1986), of the International Cunningham Press, 1951 @ Peter F. Anson, Bishops at
Academy of the Arts (later known as Kalakshetra, Large, London: Faber and Faber, 1964 @ A.T. Barker
(ed.), The Mahatma Letters, London: Rider, 1948 @
‘the Field or Holy place of Arts’), which had as its
Daniel Caldwell (ed.), The Esoteric World of Madame
object (1) ‘[t]o emphasize the essential unity of all Blavatsky, Wheaton: Theosophical Publishing House,
true Art’; (2) ‘[t]lo work for the recognition of the Quest Books, 2000 # Bruce F. Campbell, A History of
arts as vital to individual, national, religious and the Theosophical Movement, Berkeley, Los Angeles,
international growth; and (3) ‘[t]o provide for such London: University of California Press, 1980 # John
activities as may be incidental to the above objects’. Patrick Deveney, Astral Projection or Liberation ofthe
Associated with the second purpose of Kalakshetra Double and the Work of the Early Theosophical Soci-
ety, Theosophical History Occasional Papers, vol. 6,
was the revival and development of the ancient
Fullerton, CA: Theosophical History, 1997 # Michael
culture of India. To Dr. Arundale, Indian dance Gomes, The Dawning of the Theosophical Movement,
revealed occult ritual or, in his words, ‘the occult- Wheaton, IL: Theosophical Publishing House, 1987
ism of beauty’. Furthermore, the Society’s publica- idem, Witness for the Prosecution: Annie Besant’s
tion activities continued through the Theosophical Testimony on Behalf of H.P. Blavatsky in the N.Y.
Publishing House and the Vasanta Press. Sun/Coues Law Case, Theosophical History Occa-
Arundale was succeeded by Leadbeater’s pro- sional Papers, vol. 1, Fullerton, CA: Theosophical His-
tory, 1993 # Emmett A. Greenwalt, California Utopia:
tégé, C. Jinarajadasa (president from 1946-1953),
Point Loma: 1897-1942, 2nd edition, San Diego, CA:
who, among his many contributions to the Society, Point Loma Publications, Inc., 1978 [originally pub-
displayed an active interest in publishing docu- lished in 1955) # Vernon Harrison, H.P. Blavatsky and
ments centering on the history of the Society. As the SPR, Pasadena: Theosophical University Press,
one of the foremost Theosophical authors, Jinara- 1997 @ Richard Hodgson, “Account of Personal Inves-

--- Page 547 ---
1123 TOMBERG
tigations in India, and Discussion of the Authorship of he experienced a spiritual revelation which, he
the ‘Koot Hoomi’ Letters”, in: “Report of the Com- claimed, put him in contact with the angelic world.
mittee appointed to Investigate Phenomena Connected
From 1930-1938 he gave many lectures on Anthro-
with the Theosophical Society”, Society for Psychical
posophy and contributed articles to journals of Research: Proceedings 3 (1885), 207-400 @ K. Paul
Johnson, Initiates of Theosophical Masters, Albany, that movement. Some of these works were pub-
NY: State University of New York Press, 1995 @ idem, lished as early as 1933 in volumes titled Anthropo-
The Masters Revealed: Madame Blavatsky and the sophical Considerations (on the Old and the New
Myth of the Great White Lodge, Albany, NY: State Testament), which went through several editions.
University of New York Press, 1994 # Henry Steel The same year he married for the second time. Over
Olcott, Old Diary Leaves: First Series America
the 1930s he distanced himself little by little from
1874-1878, 2nd edition, Adyar, Madras, India: The
the Anthroposophical Society and he eventually Theosophical Publishing House, 1974; Second Series,
1878-83, Adyar, Madras, India: The Theosophical resigned in 1937. This change of orientation was
Publishing House, 1974 [originally published in 1900]; due partly to his own Christianity, which was more
Third Series, 1883-87, 2nd edition, Adyar, Madras, christocentric than > Rudolf Steiner’s, and partly
India: The Theosophical Publishing House, 1972 to various conflicts within the European Anthro-
[originally published in 1904, 2nd edition in 1929]; posophical Society Sections after Steiner’s death in
Fifth Series, January, 1893 — April, 1896, Adyar,
1925. In 1939 Tomberg came to Rotterdam in the
Madras, India: The Theosophical Publishing House,
Netherlands, where he gave many lectures (most of 1932 [reprinted, 1975] # A.P. Sinnett, Esoteric Bud-
dhism, 5th edition, San Diego: Wizards Bookshelf, which were subsequently published), in particular
1981 [originally published in 1883] # Josephine Ran- on the return of Christ in the ethereal world. He
som, A Short History of The Theosophical Society, then settled in Amsterdam, where he made a living
Adyar, Madras, India: The Theosophical Publishing as a translator and language teacher, and for many
House, 1938 eadem, The Seventy-fifth Anniversary months had to hide with his family from the Nazis.
Book of the Theosophical Society: A Short History of
At the end of the war he converted to Catholicism,
the Society’s Growth from 1926-1950, Adyar, Madras:
then enrolled at the University of Cologne to study The Theosophical Publishing House, 1950 W. Emmett
Small, “‘Fraternization’ — ‘Networking’ Yesterday and Law under the direction of Ernst von Hippel, and
Today”, The Eclectic Theosophist 85 (Jan./Feb. 1985), was awarded an LLD in International Law. In this
1-5 @ Anne Taylor, Annie Besant: A Biography, connection, he authored two treatises in German
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992 # Margaret (Degeneration und Regeneration der Rechtswis-
Thomas (comp.), Theosophy or Neo-Theosophy, issued senschaft, Bonn 1946, new edition 1974, and
around 1924 or 1925 (unpublished) # William J.
Die Grundlagen des Volkerrechts als Menschheit-
Whalen, Separated Brethren, 3rd revised edition,
srecht, Bonn 1947). In 1948 Tomberg left Germany Huntington, Indiana: Our Sunday Visitor, Inc., 1979.
and definitely settled in England, where, thanks to
JAMES A. SANTUCCI his remarkable linguistic gifts, he held a good pro-
fessional position at the BBC. He retired in 1960,
and spent the rest of his life in Reading, near Lon-
Theosophy, Christian > Christian
don, where from 1963 to 1967 he devoted himself
Theosophy to the writing of several works, among which are
his Meditations on the Tarot. While traveling in
Tomberg, Valentin, * 26.2.1900 Saint Majorca in 1973 he died of a stroke.
Petersburg, { 20.2.1973 Majorca Tomberg’s career as an author can be divided
into two main periods: the one before and the one
A Russian-Baltic Lutheran by birth, already as a after his conversion to Roman Catholicism. During
young man Tomberg began to move in the esoteric the first, his writings were rooted primarily in the
circles of Saint Petersburg, joining the > Theo- context of Steiner’s Anthroposophy. During the
sophical Society in 1917. The Bolshevik Revolu- second, his written output was more personal and
tion having taken a heavy toll on his family, he fled original. With the exception of his two studies in
in 1918 to Tallin (Reval, in Estonia). There he mar- German devoted to International Law, his oeuvre
ried in 1922, held (after several other jobs) a posi- consists mainly of a number of works (published
tion at the Estonian postal administration, and in either anonymously or posthumously) of an eso-
1925 was elected to the Vice-Presidency of the Ger- teric character. These — and mostly the Medita-
man-speaking branch of the Estonian Anthropo- tions — were to make him famous after his death.
sophical Society [> Anthroposophy] (in 1932 he It is obvious that in terms of presentation, Tom-
became Secretary General of the Baltic Anthropo- berg’s Meditations was influenced by a work of the
sophical Society branch). At the age of thirty-one Russian Vladimir Chmakov (a name which Tomberg

--- Page 548 ---
TOMBERG 1124
quotes only occasionally): The Great Arcana ofthe ates and with whom he shares many commona-
Tarot, the Absolute Beginning of the Synthetical lities. Indeed, Tomberg can be considered a theoso-
Philosophy of Esotericism (in Russian, Moscow pher in the classical sense of the term, although he
1916; repr. Moscow 1993). Both Chmakov’s book only uses the word in the context of discussions of
and Tomberg’s Meditations are subdivided into the ideas of the Theosophical Society. In addition,
twenty-two chapters whose contents only tenu- he lavishly reflects on figures representative of clas-
ously correspond to their titles. Each title consists sical Christian > mysticism. In an original and cre-
of the name of one of the Major trumps, but seems ative way, he compares Christian mysticism to both
merely a formal pretext for introducing reflections Eastern mysticism and Western hermeticism. Fur-
not actually related to the symbolism of the card thermore, Tomberg discusses some major issues of
(not unlike Montaigne’s Essais or > Foix-Can- psychoanalysis, aligning with > Carl Gustav Jung,
dale’s Le Pimandre d’Hermés Trismégiste in the whose views he tries to complement by adding to
16th century, in which the titles of the chapters are analytical psychology the dimension of what he
likewise only loosely related to the discussions they calls “transconsciousness”. In sum, Meditations
announce). Taken as a whole, Tomberg’s Medita- may be defined as both a compendium of modern
tions is nonetheless characterized by a very coher- Western esotericism and a stimulating critique of
ent unity of thought and inspiration. Not at all a some of its aspects, containing many profound
new method for reading the Tarot, it is, rather, a thoughts and beautiful poetic passages. In terms of
synthesis of the life-long meditations of a Christian contents and reception it has to be positioned
hermeticist. among the foremost books in Western esotericism
The author of Meditations is well versed in both published in the 2oth century.
Christian theology and the literature of modern Written in French but first published in a German
Western esoteric currents (15th to 2oth centuries), translation (1972), Meditations went through sev-
primarily spiritual > alchemy, classical theosophy eral translations and editions. The felicitous initia-
[> Christian Theosophy], ~ Naturphilosophie, as tive of publishing the manuscript is mainly to the
well as the more recent so-called Occultist current credit of Martin Kriele, a German jurist (and suc-
[> occult / occultism]. The book is a blend, as it cessor of Ernst von Hippel, see above) who consid-
were, of those currents and of Roman Catholicism ered himself Tomberg’s spiritual heir. In the 1970s
as Tomberg understood it. He finds himself in con- and 1980s, under the pretext of respecting Tom-
tradiction with regard to Catholicism, however, in berg’s anonymity, the editors and publishers of the
so far as he declares himself a defender of the belief book have contributed to the creation of an aura of
in > reincarnation. With regard to what he calls conspiratorial mystery around its author. This
“hermeticism” [+ Hermeticism and Hermetic insistence on > secrecy has been partly responsible
Societies] (i.e., esotericism as the form of thought for the Mediations’ success, but eventually, and not
of modern Western esoteric currents), he discusses unexpectedly, lost force. Be that as it may, the inter-
a great many of its representative figures, and est in Tomberg triggered by his Meditations is
defines the hermeticist as the theologian of a Holy mainly responsible for the subsequent publication
Scripture which is that of “the World”. In other and/or re-edition of some of his other writings. As
words, for Tomberg there are two complementary a matter of fact, the reception of Tomberg’s works
theologies: the first or classical one is that of the already has a complex and rich history (especially
established Churches, the second one is a hermeti- since the beginning of the 1970s). This reception
cism, which is ultimately a Philosophy of Nature. has taken on three main aspects.
Like the romantic Naturphilosophen (to whom, First, a great many enthusiastic readers have
nevertheless, he barely refers), throughout his book authored laudatory articles on Tomberg, mainly on
he evinces a strong tendency to think in terms of the Meditations. Second, Tomberg is the subject of
polarities at all the levels of reality (material, psy- severe criticism in a plethora of writings emanating
chic, spiritual, divine, etc.), in the existence of from the Anthroposophical Society (Faivre 1996,
which he believes. Although also very much at 227 nt 9). For example, Prokofieff (see Bibliogra-
home in the literature of the Occultist current — phy) warns Anthroposophists to steer clear of him.
especially the francophone one of ~ Stanislas de He considers Tomberg as a secret disciple of the
Guaita, > Papus, etc. - Tomberg is quite critical of Jesuits, a Catholic agent inimical to the “true” mes-
many forms of practical > magic, and in this con- sage of Rudolf Steiner (the fact that Cardinal Hans
nection may be said to stand in the wake of the Urs von Balthasar was chosen by the editors of
form of theosophy represented by, for instance, > Meditations for writing the preface served to fuel
Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin, whom he appreci- such a critique) and as a hermeticist infected with

--- Page 549 ---
I125 TRADITION
the occultist stream represented by > Eliphas Levi, cas Tomberg: Anthroposophie ou jésuitisme?, Ilfurth:
Stanislas de Guaita, Papus, etc. And third, since the Société Anthroposophique, 1998 # Michel Saint-Paul,
beginning of the 1990s there has been an increasing “Tomberg, Valentin”, Dictionnaire critique de l’Eso-
amount of objective scholarly studies devoted to térisme, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1998,
1301-1303 @ Liesel Heckmann, Valentin Tomberg:
Tomberg. Most important among them are the Leben (1900-1944) (Valentin Tomberg: Leben-Werk-
publications of the Ramsteiner Kreis (The Ram- Wirkung I, vol. 1), Schaffhausen: Novalis Verlag, 2001
steiner Circle), a Society established in 1990 to ¢ Ramsteiner Kreis Trier (ed.), Valentin Tomberg:
study Tomberg’s life and works. Quellen und Beitrige zum Werk, (Valentin Tomberg:
Leben-Werk-Wirkung II), Schaffhausen: Novalis Ver-
[Anonymous (like all the other eds. and translations)], lag, 2000 @ In preparation: Valentin Tomberg: Leben-
Meditationen tiber die Grossen Arcana des Tarot: 22 Werk-Wirkung 1, vol. 2, devoted to the Tomberg’s
Briefe an den unbekannten Freund (Gertrud von Hip- biography after 1944 Gerhard Wehr, “Valentin
pel, ed. and trans., preface by Ernst von Hippel), Tomberg und die grossen Arcana des Tarot”, in:
Maisenhain am Glau: Anton Hain, 1972 @ New ed.: G. Wehr, Spirituelle Meister des Westens: Leben und
Der Anonymus d’Outre Tombe: Die Grossen Arcana Lehre, Munich: Diederichs, 1995, 235-258.
des Tarot. Meditationen (new trans. by Franz Oesig
etc. of the French manuscript, with many notes from ANTOINE FAIVRE
Martin Kriele etc., and a trans. of the 1984 preface [cf.
below] by Hans Urs von Balthasar), 2. vol., Basel:
Tradition Herder, 1983, reprint 1993 @ French: Méditations sur
les 22 arcanes majeurs du Tarot, par un auteur qui a
voulu conserver l’anonymat (first ed. of the original 1. INTRODUCTION 2. PRISCA THEOLOGIA
French manuscript, with a foreword by Hans Urs von AND PHILOSOPHIA PERENNIS 3. MAIN
Balthasar), Paris: Aubier-Montaigne, 1980; Revised AUTHORS AND DEVELOPMENTS
ed. 1984 (with a slightly different version of the fore- 4. THE WISDOM OF THE ANCIENTS
word by H.U. von Balthasar, and a preface by Robert 5. TRADITIONALISM/PERENNIALISM
Spaemann) @ English: Meditations on the Tarot: A
6. PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY IN GENERAL
Journey into Christian Hermeticism (trans. by Robert
CULTURE A. Powell), New ed. (same trans.; with H.U. von Bal-
thasar’s text as Afterword), New York: Jeremy P.
Tarcher/Putman, (NY) 2002 @ Other eds. in Italian, 1. INTRODUCTION
Spanish, Portuguese, Russian @ Lazarus, komm heraus Primarily in Western esoteric contexts, but not
(title given by Martin Kriele, ed.), Basel/Freiburg: exclusively there, a wide range of terms have been
Herder, 1985; English: Covenant of the Heart: Medita- used to refer to the idea that there exists an endur-
tions of a Christian Hermeticist on the Mysteries of
ing tradition of superior spiritual wisdom, avail-
Tradition (trans. and ed. by Robert Powell and James
Morgante), Rockport (MA): Element Books, 1992 able to humanity since the earliest periods of
Anthroposophische Betrachtungen tiber das Alte Tes- history and kept alive through the ages, perhaps by
tament (Willi Seiss, ed.), Schonach/Bodensee: Acha- a chain of divinely inspired sages or initiatory
moth, 1989 (ed. in part in 1933) @ Anthroposophische groups. In tracing the development of this idea
Betrachtungen tiber das Alte Testament und die through its main historical stages, we will restrict
Apokalypse (Martin Kriele, ed.), Schonach/Bodensee: ourselves to those authors and currents who explic-
Achamoth, 1989 (ed. in part in 1933); English:
itly align themselves with such a tradition under
Anthroposophical Studies of the New Testament,
Hudson (NY): Anthroposophic Press, 1985 # Sieben one of its common names - e.g. prisca theologia,
Vortrage iiber die innere Entwickelung des Menschen, prisca sapientia, pia philosophia, (philo)sophia
Schonach/Bodensee: Achamoth, 1993; English: Inner perennis, perennial philosophy, perennial wisdom,
Development: 7 Lectures by Valentin Tomberg (trans. “the wisdom of the ancients”, or simply “Tradi-
by R. and P. Bloeden), Hudson (NY): Anthroposophi- tion” with a capital T — rather than widening the
cal Press, 2000. field so as to include any theory focused on the need
to recover a lost spiritual world-order. The term
Lit. Antoine Faivre, “Analysis of the Meditations of
Valentin Tomberg on the Twenty-Two Major Arcana “philosophia perennis” has been used in the latter
of the Tarot of Marseilles”, in: A. Faivre, Theosophy, sense notably by Wilhelm Schmidt-Biggemann, ina
Imagination, Tradition (Series Studies in Western Eso- major study (1998) which includes so much that
tericism), Albany: SUNY Press, 1996, 191-228 ¢@ most mystical and esoteric as well as many addi-
Sergei O. Prokofieff and Christian Lazarides, Der Fall tional philosophical traditions from antiquity to
Tomberg — Anthroposophie oder Jesuitismus?, Dor-
the period of + Romanticism can be seen as falling
nach: Goetheanum, 1995 (new enlarged, auto-edited
under the umbrella. Although it is true that the au-
version, 1996); English: The Case of Valentin Tom-
berg: Anthroposophy or Jesuitism? (trans. by Richard thors and currents treated below under the heading
Mitchell), London: Temple Lodge, 1997; French: Le of “tradition” typically evince a sense of nostalgia

--- Page 550 ---
TRADITION 1126
for a lost or diminished world-order of wholeness of the Magi [1997], 393, 400). Combining these
and truth (an interesting exception, however, will two traditions, it was natural for Renaissance
be discussed at the very end of this overview), it is philosophers to conclude from the sources at their
by no means the case that every author in whom we disposal that true philosophy had not begun with
find such longings perceives himself and his work the Greeks and true religion had not begun with the
as a link in the chain of those who have preserved Hebrews; the two had their common origin in a
Truth and Wisdom through the ages. What charac- much more ancient “prisca theologia” or “prisca
terizes the currents and authors treated here, sapientia”, also known as magic and widespread
however, is precisely this sense of being part of a in the ancient world; and of course — by the very
trans-historical “community”, of which it is fact that it was “true” — this ancient wisdom had
believed that all members would basically have to be compatible with the fundamental tenets of
agreed among one another, had they been able to Christianity.
meet. Thus, for example, an author like > Jacob In terms of its underlying macrohistorical as-
Boehme — treated under the heading of “philo- sumptions [-* Macrohistories], this thesis con-
sophia perennis” by Schmidt-Biggemann — is not tained an inherent paradox that has not been
included, precisely because his work is presented as systematically analyzed by scholars. In 1964
a new and original revelation rather than as a refor- Frances Yates opened her Giordano Bruno and the
mulation of enduring truths. In contrast to authors Hermetic Tradition with the statement that ‘[t]he
like Boehme, representatives of “tradition” as great forward movements of the Renaissance all
understood here typically engage in exegetical derive their vigour, their emotional impulse, from
commentaries on earlier religious and philosophi- looking backwards’, and continued by nicely for-
cal texts and traditions, in order to demonstrate mulating the fundamental paradox: ‘progress was
that — apparent contradictions notwithstanding — revival, rebirth, renaissance of antiquity’ (1964, I).
all of them contain the same universal verities; this She did not, however, call attention to the deeper
is very different from what we find in authors like roots of the same paradox: the very superiority of
Boehme, who concentrate their exegetical enter- Christianity with respect to earlier religions would
prise not on human texts and traditions but on the seem to imply a doctrine of progress, whereas the
Bible itself understood as God’s Word. idea of a superior prisca theologia would seem to
imply a doctrine of degeneration.
2. PRISCA THEOLOGIA AND It might be suggested that the concept of a
PHILOSOPHIA PERENNIS “philosophia perennis”, which is historically later
Already Plutarch referred to the ‘ancient, vener- than that of “prisca theologia” (see below), reflects
able theologians’ (ot te né&A01 Beordyou, or “prisci a certain awareness of this paradox and perhaps an
theologi”: De animae procreatione in Timaeo 33, attempt at solving it. The earlier term emphasized
103A-B; cf. De Iside et Osiride 10) as the ‘oldest the idea of a wisdom that has been lost, forgotten,
philosophers’, and a high regard for pre-platonic overlooked or neglected, and should now be recov-
philosophers as teachers of religious wisdom can ered (implicitly admitting, even if this was not the
be found in various classical, (neo)platonic as conscious intention of its defenders, that Christian-
well as Christian authors (see e.g. Diogenes Laer- ity had so far failed to recover it), whereas the later
tius, ~ Augustine, Lactantius, Iamblichus, Pro- one emphasized the continuity of true wisdom
clus, Michael Psellus, and many medieval through the ages. The perennial wisdom had
theologians interested in the ~ Hermetic litera- always been present: the fundamental verities of
ture). To understand how such references came to true religion — monotheism, the Trinity, the cre-
be interpreted by the Renaissance proponents of ation of the world ex nihilo, and so on — could be
prisca theologia, obviously in a Christian context, found already in the religious wisdom of the
they must be seen in connection with what various ancient philosophers. This emphasis on “enduring
other classical sources had to say about payeta or truth” might mitigate the danger of making the
magic. Its practitioners (the Magi) were recognized ancient wisdom superior to the more recent reli-
not only among the Persians, but also among the gion of Christianity, but of course it did not really
Egyptians, Babylonians, Syrians and Indians. And solve the problem: if the fundamental verities of
beginning with Pseudo-Plato (Alcibiades 1.122A) Christianity had already been known before the
there existed a tradition — e.g. Diogenes Laertius, birth of Christ, did this not undermine the unique-
Dio Chrysostomus and Porphyry — which held that ness of the Christian revelation and perhaps even
this uayeta was not a black art but the ancient make it superfluous? But the logical solution —
“worship of the gods” (Albert de Jong, Traditions perceiving Christianity as superior to any earlier

--- Page 551 ---
1027 TRADITION
religious wisdom, implying a macrohistory of reli- ever: from 1464 on and until the end of his life,
gious progress — would imply the inferiority of the Ficino decided to give precedence to Zoroaster as
“ancient wisdom” and thereby undermine the very the very earliest priscus theologus (largely because
project of either a prisca theologia or a philosophia of the authority of the biblical story of the Magi,
perennis. From a historical perspective, this inher- interpreted as Zoroastrians, who had worshipped
ent paradoxality might be seen as the main creative the Christ Child as ‘the ultimate Zoroastrian’; see
impetus that has propelled the continuing quest for Allen 1998, 37-40, cit. 39). Zoroaster preceded not
“tradition”: the very fact that the problem could only Hermes Trismegistus, but even Moses; in fact,
never be definitely solved made it necessary to keep associating Zoroaster with the Chaldaeans as well
trying. as the Persians, Ficino suggested that Abraham
himself had already taken the Zoroastrian wisdom
3. MAIN AUTHORS AND with him when he set out from the city of Ur of the
DEVELOPMENTS Chaldaeans in quest of the promised land (Allen
Perhaps not surprisingly, the originator of the 0.c., 39). Accordingly, in Ficino’s Philebus-com-
Renaissance prisca theologia discourse was not a mentary (1469) and in the Theologia Platonica,
Christian. The Byzantine platonist > Giorgios finished in 1474, Philolaus has vanished and
Gemistos Plethon (13 55/1360-1454) believed in a Zoroaster is added as the very first authority in the
universal religious philosophy, the principles of list, with Hermes as the second one (see e.g. Theol.
which were ‘as old as the universe and were always Platsn sas 6 e704. S317 Ti2h 74 A 17 A).
among mankind’. The most ancient representative Interestingly, although Ficino mentions Zoroaster
of this wisdom known to Plethon was Zoroaster, more than seventy times in his work, and almost
whom he believed to have flourished some 5000 fifty times with reference to the Persian Magi, and
years before the Trojan War and be the author of although he clearly associates him with magic, he
the Chaldaean Oracles (actually written in the 2nd made no reference to the traditional topos of
century C.E.). From here, Plethon outlined a chain Zoroaster as the one who had invented it (Staus-
of sages: in chronological order the universal reli- berg 1998, 163; and cf. 503-569).
gious wisdom had been proclaimed by Zoroaster, That Ficino — undoubtedly inspired by Plethon —
Eumolpus (founder of the Eleusinian mysteries), gave Zoroaster the first place in his chain of wis-
Minos (the Cretan lawgiver), Lycurgus (the Spar- dom is of great importance for understanding how
tan legislator), Iphitus (the reviver of the Olympic the prisca theologia could come to be seen as sup-
games), and Numa (reformer of Roman religious port for a revival of > magic and the occult philos-
worship). By means of the Pythagoreans the origi- ophy [> Occult/Occultism] in Renaissance culture.
nal Zoroastrian wisdom had finally reached Plato. Since the neoplatonic theurgy of the Chaldaean
Plethon, who had little respect for the Egyptians, Oracles was attributed to Zoroaster, the chief
never mentioned Hermes Trismegistus. of the Magi and earliest in the chain of wisdom,
+ Marsilio Ficino’s Theologia Platonica presents nothing could be more logical than seeing prisca
Plato — read by Ficino through neoplatonic lenses — theologia and mageia as equivalent. Hence the con-
as essentially a religious author. That the founda- clusion, attributed to > Giovanni Pico della Miran-
tional tenets of his “theology” did not originate dola, that ‘Zoroaster . . . in practicing magic, took
with him but had very ancient origins is already that to be the cult of God and study of divinity;
suggested in the “Argumentum” that prefaces while engaged in this in Persia he most succesfully
Ficino’s famous translation of the Corpus Her- investigated every virtue and power of nature, in
meticum (1463; publ. 1471). Ficino here describes order to know those sacred and sublime secrets of
a genealogy of wisdom — explicitly referred to the divine intellect; which subject many people
as prisca theologia — consisting of six main fig- called theurgy, others Cabala or magic’ (Pico as
ures: Mercurius (Hermes) Trismegistus, Orpheus, quoted by Pietro Crinito, see Walker 1972, 50). It
Aglaophemus (an Orphic teacher of Pythagoras), must be noted that, remarkably, Hermes Tris-
Pythagoras, Philolaus, Plato. Except for Trismegis- megistus is the only priscus theologus not listed as
tus, the genealogy is derived from Proclus (Theolo- a magician by Pico (Farmer 1998, 121); perhaps
gia Platonica I, 5), but Ficino explicitly follows > because he wanted to avoid the notorious problem
Augustine (De civ. Dei XVIII, 39) in placing Her- of the “god-making” passages in the Asclepius (23-
mes after Moses, who may have been learned in all 24, 37-38), condemned by Augustinus as idola-
the arts of the Egyptians (Acts 7:22) but cannot trous. Pico differs from Ficino not only in his explicit
have derived his wisdom from Hermetic sources. defense of mageia as the ‘perfect and highest wis-
This primacy accorded to Moses did not last, how- dom’ and ‘nothing but the absolute consummation

--- Page 552 ---
TRADITION 1128
of the philosophy of nature’ (in contrast, of course, Giorgio generally mentions Zoroaster in a positive
to the ‘execrable and monstrous’ practices of goe- sense, Hermes is given much greater prominence.
teia; see De hom. dign.), but notably also in espous- Among all the prisci theologi he has revealed the
ing a syncretism so extreme and all-encompassing highest and most sublime wisdom, derived not
that it ended up relativizing the very exclusivity of from books or human science but directly from the
the prisca theologia: truth could be found in many, divine source itself (Im Scripturam Sacram Prob-
indeed in all traditions, including Averroes, the lemata c. 316, VI). Giorgio frequently refers to all
Quran, the kabbalah, and even Aristotle and the the other standard prisci theologi but — espousing
medieval scholastics (Schmitt 1966, 513; cf. Far- rather a “philosophia perennis” approach — seems
mer 1998). somewhat less concerned with genealogies and
While Ficino gave chronological priority to more with the general theme of a continuity of wis-
Moses over Hermes (although not over Zoroaster), dom: he tends to merely give lists of authorities
others argued that Hermes had lived much earlier. rather than putting them in a clear chronological
Thus ~ Lodovico Lazzarelli referred to Diodorus order. The exception to this is his insistence on the
Siculus, who in his Bibliotheca Historica |. 13ff. priority of Moses: in the end, all the non-biblical
had related how first the gods and then men reigned authorities in his many lists, Hermes included, are
in Egypt. Since it is known that Trismegistus ‘lived imitators of Moses, the only man who ever spoke
among the gods in the time of the gods’ - which is with God face to face.
taken to mean ‘perfect and true men and sages’ -, ~ Francesco Patrizi’s genealogies of wisdom are
Lazzarelli concludes that therefore he cannot have strange variations on Ficino’s, and surprisingly
lived in the period of the Pharaohs, who were ‘nei- start with Noah’s son Ham, usually considered the
ther divine nor true and perfect men, but can originator of idolatry, superstition and demonic
scarcely be called human at all’ (1st Preface to Cor- magic. Patrizi’s genealogies exist in several varia-
reggio). And in his Crater Hermetis (3.1) he quotes tions, but their main elements seem to be that Ham
Porphyry (Fragment 323 F), according to whom is either identical with Zoroster or had a son of that
the Egyptians were the first ‘to pass on the tradi- name, who was a contemporary of Abraham and
tion’, which moved on from them to the Phoeni- was known in Egypt as Osiris. Zoroaster/Osiris’s
cians and the Assyrians, and from there reached the counselor there was a certain Hermes Trismegistus,
Hebrews. In Lazzarelli, then, more clearly than in whose grandson was likewise called Hermes Tris-
either Ficino or Pico, it is Hermes Trismegistus who megistus. This younger Hermes was a little older
stands at the origin of the prisca theologia. than Moses, and wrote the Corpus Hermeticum.
Zoroaster is mentioned only once (Crater 30.1), Orpheus adopted the Hermetic wisdom when he
with reference to Pseudo-Plato’s Alcibiades 1.122 came to Egypt, and took it with him to Greece,
A (see above), and Lazzarelli does not discuss his from whence it was passed on from Aglaophemus
place in the chronology. Lazzarelli is also interest- and Pythagoras to Plato and his pupils.
ing in how he handles the paradox of prisca the- The Italian prisca theologia tradition was
ologia mentioned above (sect. 1). In an attempt to adopted by many later authors during the 16th cen-
solve the problem of the god-making passages in tury and beyond. In addition to the central prisci
the Asclepius, he argues that Hermes had lapsed theologi already mentioned, other names came to
into idolatry because as a pagan he was not yet be added. Among the more frequent candidates
capable of perfectly understanding the message were Adam, Enoch, Abraham, Noah, the Brah-
revealed to him; only Christians are capable of this, mins, the Druids (popular among French authors,
and only in his own days has the harmony between for obvious chauvinistic reasons), and the Sybils.
hermetism and Christianity been fully revealed — in But later genealogies of ancient wisdom might also
the person of Lazzarelli’s master ~ Giovanni include e.g. Asclepius, Musaeus, Daedalus, Homer,
“Mercurio” da Corregio, the “hermetic Christ”. Lycurgus, Solon, Heraclitus, Aristotle, Eudoxus,
Thus Lazzarelli comes close to achieving the Democritus, Plotinus, Numenius, Philo of Alexan-
impossible: defending the prisca theologia within a dria, Origin, Augustinus — in short, anyone consid-
discourse of “progress” — not, of course, of the ered an authority by the author in question. Special
divine truth as such, but of its correct understand- mention must be made of the French authors
ing and expression by human recipients — from (including, among many others, > Lefévre d’Eta-
Hermetism, via Christianity, to the synthesis of ples, > Champier, - Lefévre de la Boderie, and >
both in his own times. Foix-Candale) who adopted the prisca theologia-
A clear preference for Hermes over Zoroaster is tradition from Italy. They provide often very differ-
also to be found in > Francesco Giorgio. Although ent lists of ancient sages, but in line with their

--- Page 553 ---
1129 TRADITION
cautious attitude towards magic (Walker 1972, prisca theologia, was first introduced in 1540 by
63), Hermes tends to be given precedence over the theologian and biblical scholar Agustino Steuco,
Zoroaster. The crucial question always concerned, then librarian of the Vatican. A representative of
rather, the relative priority of Hermes Trismegistus the liberal wing of 16th-century Catholic theology,
and Moses. Most French authors (e.g. Champier, Steuco was a staunch opponent of the Reforma-
Lefévre d’Etaples, Louis le Caron, Philippe de Mor- tion. In fact, both the prisca theologia and the
nay) preferred the safer because more obviously philosophia perennis in the Renaissance in general
orthodox option of making Hermes a contempo- seem to have been largely a Roman Catholic affair:
rary or successor of Moses, thus making sure that not by chance, Casaubon’s 1614 attack on the
the origins of wisdom could be located with the authenticity of the Corpus Hermeticum was the
Hebrews, from where it could have been passed on product of a Protestant scholar criticizing a church
via Egypt to other Gentile nations. A minority of history in Counter-Reformation style (Cesare
French authors (e.g. Foix-Candale) followed Laz- Baronio’s Annales Ecclesiastici, 1588-1607). As
zarelli in giving chronological priority to Hermes; explained by Walker (1972, 126f.), the few Protes-
but those who chose that option were careful to tants influenced by the Ancient Theology belonged
restrict the pre-Jewish revelation only to those reli- to the more liberal wing of the Reformation, that
gious truths that could be attained by natural rea- based its arguments on an appeal to reason; but
son (Walker 1972, 70). most Protestants either neglected the prisca theolo-
The entire edifice of the prisca theologia obvi- gia or heaped scorn on it.
ously rested on belief in the great antiquity of the Steuco’s large work De perenni philosophia,
founding authorities and their writings: Zoroaster dedicated to the author’s friend and protector Pope
and Hermes. In 1567, Gilbert Genebrard in his Paul III, was reprinted several times during the
Chronographia gave arguments why Hermes could 16th century and enjoyed much prestige until far in
not have been a contemporary or predecessor of the 17th century. Although it also came in for its
Moses but must have lived in more recent times, share of criticism, it was never placed on the Index,
and additional arguments were adduced by Mat- contrary to some other works by Steuco that were
thieu Beroalde in 1575. Jean van Gorp (Hiero- hit by official condemnations. Its key theme, which
glyphica, 1580) even went as far as denying that defines the very concept of philosophia perennis, is
Hermes had ever existed. Patrizi’s four-volume the existence of ‘one principle of all things, of
Discussiones peripateticae (1581), which strongly which there has always been one and the same
restated the prisca theologia perspective, was at- knowledge among all peoples’. As pointed out by
tacked in 1584 and 1585 by a pupil of Genebrard, Schmitt, Steuco’s narrative is lacking in any con-
the humanist grammarian Teodoro Angelucci, who cept of progress. Instead, he emphasizes either con-
used all the arguments given by Genebrard, tinuity or degradation: in the first stages of history
Beroalde and van Gorp. Responses by Patrizi and knowledge is still perfect, being handed down by
his friend Francesco Muti did not succeed in chang- God himself; then it gets dissipated and scattered;
ing Angelucci’s mind, and in a long letter to Anto- and finally, ‘it seems to us to be like a mere story or
nio Persio written in 1588 (first published by dream’ (Schmitt 1966, 517). After the Flood, the
Mulsow in 2002) he wrote down the most thor- perfect divine knowledge began to decline, as many
ough criticism of the prisca theologia edifice things had not been written down and were forgot-
known to us from the 16th century. In 1614, ten. The vera philosophia was kept alive only by
finally, Isaac Casaubon published his De rebus sac- the few, mainly among the Chaldaeans, Armeni-
ris et ecclesiasticis exercitationes X VI, in one chap- ans, Babylonians, Assyrians, Egyptians and Phoe-
ter of which he correctly dated the Corpus nicians. From the Chaldaeans the true wisdom was
Hermeticum, thus definitely undermining the intel- passed on to the Jews, who transmitted it to the
lectual foundations of the prisca theologia edifice. Egyptians, from whom it traveled on to the Greeks,
As for the Chaldaean Oracles, their attribution to who finally introduced it to the Romans. Steuco
Zoroaster seems to have been first questioned by roughly follows Ficino’s genealogy of wisdom but
the Calvinist theologian Theodore Beza; and from strongly emphasizes Hermes Trismegistus, who is
the 17th century on, an increasing number of schol- mentioned no less than 214 times (against 16 times
ars (e.g. Petrus Lambeccius, Theophilus Spizelius, for Zoroaster and 96 for Orpheus; Crociata 1987,
Johann Heinrich Ursinus, Thomas Burnet) came to 234-239) and whose importance might be equal
recognize them correctly as products of hellenistic even to that of Moses. Somewhat like Pico, he is
platonism from the period after Christ. engaged in a project of extreme syncretism, trying
The term philosophia perennis, as distinct from ‘to make nearly everyone agree’ (Schmitt 0.c., 523).

--- Page 554 ---
TRADITION 1130
This includes the philosophy of Aristotle, who is present-day representatives, and of a universal reli-
treated with respect but clearly seen as inferior to gion that transcends external worship and the dis-
the tradition flowing from ‘divinus Plato’ (De per. agreements of dogmatic theology. But in spite of its
phil.Il, 10). prominence in the Constitutions, the mythical his-
Charles B. Schmitt has traced the reception his- tory of the Order has not come to play a great role
tory of Steuco’s work through the 16th and 17th in regular Freemasonry; it continued to be further
centuries up to the early 18th, discussing defenders developed mostly in the various systems of “high-
of his approach as well as critics (1966, 524-531). grade” masonry, where all kinds of legendary and
An important late adherent of this history is Gott- esoteric materials could be used to construe narra-
fried Wilhelm Leibniz, who was long believed to tives (often quite fantastic) of how the true knowl-
have invented the term philosophia perennis. He edge had been passed on. For example the
used it in a much quoted letter to Remond (august para-masonic ~ neo-Templar traditions believed in
26, 1714): “Truth is more widely spread than one a secret transmission of knowledge since the sup-
might think, but it is very often obscured... In pression of the Knights Templars in the middle
calling attention to these traces of truth among the ages, and the system of the Philalethes proclaimed
Ancients ... one would be drawing the gold from the existence of ‘a science as ancient as men on
the mud, the diamond from its mine, and light out earth’ that has been passed on by tradition and that
of darkness; and that would in fact be perennis is able to give ‘the greatest possible happiness to
quaedam Philosophia’. Important here is that Leib- man’. This tradition is like the trunk of a tree, from
niz seems to have been the first to mention the term which have sprung the ‘occult sciences, known
philosophia perennis without specific reference to under the name of magic, kabbalah, hermetic phi-
Steuco. The result was a rupture in the transmis- losophy, theosophy, pneumatology, theurgy etc.’,
sion history of the term: while Steuco’s work fell all of which are seen as closely related to Freema-
into oblivion and Leibniz’s fame caused his refer- sonry. Important later authors who include a vari-
ence to be picked up by later authors unaware of its ety of earlier esoteric currents and the occult
Renaissance precedents, “philosophia perennis” sciences within a masonic context are e.g. > Jean-
now began to be used in a new, more general and Marie Ragon de Bettignies (La philosophie occulte,
often vaguer way. 1853) and John Yarker (Scientific and Religious
Mysteries of Antiquity [1878], The Arcane Schools
4. THE WISDOM OF THE ANCIENTS [1909]).
Prisca theologia, philosophia perennis or related The notion of “tradition” begins to play a role
concepts of a primordial or universal tradition of in the Christian theosophical current only during
wisdom play only a minor role in the predomi- the later 18th century. Johann Friedrich Kleuker
nantly Protestant esoteric traditions of > Paracel- (1749-1827), in his commentary on the first books
sianism, > Rosicrucianism and -> early Christian by Saint-Martin, speaks of a ‘chain of Tradition’
Theosophy (Faivre 1999, 12-16). The phenomenon that can be perceived through all periods of history.
of an “invention of Tradition” only re-emerged as This ‘continuous thread’ has its origin in ‘an origi-
a major trend in Western esoteric currents with > nal light’, and ultimately leads back to the Creator
Freemasonry in the early 18th century. The Consti- himself. > Louis Claude de Saint-Martin himself,
tutions of James Anderson (1723) contain a grand in De l’esprit des choses (1802), speaks of a
mythical history of the Order, beginning with “mother Tradition” written by God in the very
Adam, who had ‘the Liberal Sciences, particularly hearts of men and anterior to any books or human
Geometry, written on his heart’? by the Grand traditions. The latter are only “copies” of the one
Architect of the universe. He taught it to his sons, Tradition, it being understood that the Jewish and
and from there it spread all over the world. Almost Christian ones are more faithful to the original.
all biblical personalities of any importance are pre- The macrohistorical notion of degeneration — in
sented as masons and experts in geometry and line with basic Christian theosophical notions of
architecture, and the story of how this knowledge the Fall -— is clearly implied in Saint-Martin’s
was transmitted is carried on from biblical times to description of ‘all traditions of the earth... as
the 18th century. The Constitutions furthermore ruins of a fundamental mother-tradition’ (o.c. II,
refer to the existence of a ‘Religion in which all 147). The same notion of a “mother-tradition” is
Men agree’, and which allows each Brother the also adopted by > Franz von Baader (Samtliche
freedom to form his own particular opinions. Thus Werke IX, 371-381).
we see re-emerge the basic themes of a primal wis- In > Swedenborg, although his system has no
dom carried on through the ages until it reaches its room for a concept of the Fall, we find remnants of

--- Page 555 ---
Ta i TRADITION
classic golden-age theories and the idea of a grad- Later than Swedenborg and Court, but still rep-
ual decline of wisdom. The members of the “most resenting a somewhat similar approach, is the neo-
ancient church”, before the Flood, were “celestial Pythagorean esotericist > Antoine Fabre d’Olivet.
people”; their “adamic intellect” allowed them to Fabre believed that all doctrines were derived from
communicate directly with the angels and have an ‘a grand Unity, the eternal source from which
intuitive grasp of the truth. They were followed by everything flows’ (Histoire philosophique du genre
the “most ancient” church after the Flood, the humain I, 1). This original unity corresponds with
members of which no longer had an intuitive grasp an original language revealed directly by God.
of the truth, but could read the signs of divine wis- From the four antediluvean idioms of this language
dom in nature, and expressed it by means of an derive the three primordial idioms of Hebrew, San-
elaborate system of signs, images, emblems and skrit and Chinese, all three of which are hiero-
hieroglyphs. The third, “Jewish Church” repre- glyphic languages that contain deep esoteric truths.
sented a further stage of decline; but the Old Testa- The “Tradition” or primitive revelation was passed
ment still contained the true wisdom in a coded on from Egypt to, notably, » Moses, Pythagoras
form, which the Jews themselves did not under- and Orpheus; but Fabre also refers to Buddha,
stand. The birth of “the Lord” in the person of writes that Orpheus derived his ideas from Ram,
Jesus Christ was the beginning of the fourth Zoroaster and Krishna (“Krischnen”), and sug-
Church, which declined and degenerated, and will gests that Moses’ knowledge has its origins in
now be replaced by the fifth or “New Church” Atlantis. In other words, we find in his works a
based upon Swedenborg’s own revelations. Swe- confused reception of prisca theologia and philo-
denborg may be seen as a boundary case in terms of sophia perennis traditions combined with a new
the concept of “tradition” as understood here. His interest in Hinduism and Buddhism, typical of his
work does not contain any concept of a philoso- time. However, it is important to realize that, all
phia perennis carried on by inspired sages through these references to historical traditions, persons
history; but one might say that his revelations are and lines of transmission notwithstanding, Fabre’s
intended to lead humanity back to a prisca theolo- approach is explicitly non-historical. Undoubtedly
gia or primal divine wisdom, which has been rein- in reaction to the “historicism” typical of the
stated by “the Lord” in succesive stages of history. Romantic era, he is at pains to distinguish between
In describing those stages, however, Swedenborg “allegorical” and “positive” history. The latter
does not focus on persons (there are no significant merely records dates and events, and is inferior to
references in his work to e.g. Zoroaster, Hermes the former. Allegorical history, which alone is wor-
Trismegistus, Orpheus, Pythagoras, or Plato) but thy of study, freely includes fictional and mytho-
on Churches: even many persons mentioned in logical elements, and ‘arranges events that may
the Old Testament are interpreted as codes for never have happened into a dramatization of the
Churches and divisions of Churches. spiritual destiny of humanity’ (McCalla 1998,
It is interesting to compare Swedenborg’s ap- 259). The very distinction between fiction and
proach with that of another 18th-century author, truth in historiography is rejected as the sterile
~ Antoine Court de Gébelin in his Le monde prim- product of the ‘cold chronologists’. This attitude
itif (9 vols.; 1773-1782). Both attempt to recover already foreshadows the blanket rejection of aca-
an original wisdom that was known to the most demic historiography typical of the 2oth-century
ancient peoples, and a lost harmony between Traditionalist current, and in fact Fabre d’Olivet
heaven and earth, and both believe that the original must be regarded as a major source for the latter
knowledge was once expressed in the “hiero- (Faivre 1999, 22).
glyphic” language of myth and symbol. Both also The general idea of a “primitive Tradition” (also
combine Protestant backgrounds with a rationalist referred to e.g. by > Joseph de Maistre), the rise of
approach of “demythologization”, that seeks to “historical consciousness” in the early rgth cen-
decipher ancient traditions according to an allegor- tury, the new knowledge of and appreciation for
ical method. Both, furthermore, do not concentrate oriental religions, and the Romantic quest for a
on the philosophers of antiquity but are mostly universal mythology and symbolism, all combined
interested in how the wisdom of the ancients flows to produce a novel genre of esoteric and occultist
into the Hebrew tradition and is passed on from historiography in the r9th century. While present-
there. But different from the case of Swedenborg, ing themselves as factual and descriptive histories,
Court’s strongly neoplatonic and neopythagorean in fact its representatives typically mix up fact and
approach explicitly refers to e.g. the Hermetic writ- fancy, history and myth, thus producing highly fan-
ings and kabbalistic traditions. tastic narratives carried by the Romantic attraction

--- Page 556 ---
TRADITION 1132
of arcane secrets, long forgotten or suppressed by pheus, Pythagoras, Plato, and Jesus (Schuré pub-
the establishment but now finally revealed. Thus > lished a separate treatise devoted to Buddha).
Eliphas Lévi in his Dogme et rituel de la haute Schuré writes that the truth has always been avail-
magie (1854-1856) proclaimed ‘the discovery of able to man: it can be found in all the great religions
the grand secrets of religion and the primitive sci- and sacred books, if only one knows how to read
ence of the magi and the unity of the universal them. Referring to Leibniz’s mention of a perennis
dogma’; and his History of Magic (1859) is a thor- quaedam philosophia, he explicitly announces a
oughly confused and highly Romantic amalgam of “comparative esotericism” that proves the great
traditions beginning with the ‘fabulous origins’ of antiquity, continuity, and unity of esoteric doctrine
magic in the books of Enoch, continuing with in East and West.
Zoroaster, the Indian gymnosophists (descended
from Cain and the source of ~ gnosticism), the 5. TRADITIONALISM/PERENNIALISM
Egyptian Hermes Trismegistus and the > Tarot, the Occultist historiographies as discussed above are
Greeks (incl. Orpheus), Pythagoras, and the Jewish engaged in an “invention of tradition” within a
kabbalah. Although Plato gets less attention (he r9th-century historicist context: uncritical and
had ‘less depth but more eloquence than Pythago- naive though they may be in their use of sources,
ras’, and his ‘doctrine’ was derived from Egypt; 0.c, and questionable though their underlying assump-
124, 127), one still recognizes here the main stages tions may be, they are nevertheless attempts at
of the traditional prisca theologia; but with the writing actual histories of the “ancient wisdom”
important qualification that all these traditions of and its continuation through the ages. Their im-
ancient wisdom are now seen as reflections of plicit respect for historiography — i.e., the impor-
“kabbalah”, understood in a universal sense [> tance attached to sources and documents as
Jewish Influences V]. “proof”, see e.g. the mysterious books referred to
Many books based upon essentially the same by — H.P. Blavatsky as basic to Isis Unveiled and
approach have been published since the second half The Secret Doctrine — makes their approach differ-
of the roth century and throughout the 2oth, in the ent from that of the so-called “perennialist” or
contexts of occultism and modern Theosophy. “Traditionalist” current represented by authors
They typically trace their authors’ own beliefs and like + René Guénon, Ananda Coomaraswamy, >
religious allegiances back to the teachings of Frithjof Schuon, > Julius Evola, Seyyed Hosseyn
ancient “mystery schools” in East and West, and Nasr and many others. As summarized by Antoine
most of them are in fact attempts at comparative Faivre (1999, 33), the perennialist perspective is
study of religions from an esoteric point of view. based upon three postulates: (1) There exists a pri-
All of them claim a universal wisdom, as program- mordial Tradition of non-human origin — human-
matically formulated e.g. by > Anna Kingsford in ity has not invented but received it — which has
The Perfect Way (1881, Introduction): ‘there has progressively gotten lost, and of which the various
been in the world from the earliest ages a system historical traditions and metaphysics are the mem-
which . . . being founded in the nature of Existence bra disjecta. The source of this Tradition cannot be
itself, is eternal in its truth and application, and... identified by means of scholarly historiography. (2)
is no other than that which all the great religions of Modern Western culture, science and civilization is
the world have, under various guises and with inherently incompatible with Tradition; never
varying degrees of success, striven to express’. before has humanity been alienated from the latter
One particular title must be highlighted here, not as seriously as today. (3) The Tradition may be
only because of its enormous influence (it has been recovered, partially at least, by focusing on the
reprinted many hundreds of times, and translated common denominators of the various religious and
into many languages), but because it explicitly metaphysical traditions. Such research cannot be
combines the original Renaissance concept of neutral but requires the seeker to embrace the fun-
prisca theologia with a rgoth-century project of damental Traditional values and perspectives, and
“comparative religions” on occultist foundations. preferably to have undergone “initiation”. The
~+ Edouard Schuré’s The Great Initiates: A Study of Tradition can only be understood from the per-
the Secret History of Religions (French orig. 1889) spective of Tradition itself; the very idea of neutral,
is based upon a genealogy that places the sources of “disinterested” historical research in which the evi-
wisdom in India, but has it flow from there by way dence of surviving sources is the ultimate yardstick
of Egypt to Israel and Greece, finally to culminate reflects a modernist and historicist perspective
in Christianity: his genealogy of “great initiates” incompatible with Tradition.
consists of Rama, Krishna, Hermes, Moses, Or- + René Guénon, usually seen as the “founder”

--- Page 557 ---
1133 TRADITION
of the 2oth-century “perennialist” or “traditional- As for Western esoteric currents, they have no
ist” school, was born in a milieu of strict Catholi- special prominence in Guénon’s vision. The various
cism, and his concept of tradition owes much to his French occultist currents and orders in which he
early familiarity with the French current of Roman was himself involved during his early years he later
Catholic “traditionalism”, including authors such came to reject as perversions, and he wrote books
as Jean-Sébastien Devoucoux (1804-1870), > E-G. against -> spiritualism and the perspective of the >
Lacuria (1806-1890), Jean-Baptiste Pitra (1812- Theosophical Society. About the hermetic/alchem-
1889) and Alexis de Sarachaga (1840-1918). Gué- ical, paracelsian and Christian theosophical cur-
non does not use the term “philosophia perennis” rents since the Renaissance — a period which for
but prefers to speak of “the primordial tradition” him represented not a rebirth of ancient wisdom
or simply “metaphysics”. He never clearly defines but one more stage in the process of degeneration —
it, not even in the chapter “What must we under- he knew little, and cared less. We discuss him in the
stand by Tradition?” in his Introduction générale a present context, therefore, not because he identi-
l'étude des doctrines hindoues (1921); but one may fied himself as belonging to the history of Western
summarize his perspective by saying that Tradition esotericism but because, as a matter of historical
for him stands, quite simply, for the enduring Truth fact, his perspective has come to play an important
as he sees it. This Truth is based upon certain meta- role in its subsequent development, particularly in
physical “first principles”, which are therefore uni- the French context. For Guénon himself, the trans-
versal by definition. They cannot be doubted: any historical “community” with which he identified
attempt to “prove” their truth by arguments means consisted simply of those in East and West who had
putting the cart before the horse, for these princi- let themselves be guided by metaphysical Truth,
ples themselves should be accepted as the founda- regardless of their religious allegiance.
tion and starting point, in order for any correct Ananda K. Coomaraswamy (1877-1947) had
understanding of reality to be possible at all. It is already developed convictions very similar to
therefore internally consistent that Guénon refuses Guénon’s by the time he encountered the latter’s
to play by the rules of the historian and does not writings, by 1930, and began to correspond with
underpin his statements by source quotations; and him. He preferred the term “primordial doctrine”,
all the more so since “historical consciousness” but did use the term “philosophia perennis” as
itself is a product of modernity, which is considered well; both are synonymous for him with Tradition.
the antithesis of Tradition in all respects. Likewise, Frithjof Schuon (1907-1998) is similar to Cooma-
he does not appeal to the authority of earlier wis- raswamy in that both found their inspiration orig-
dom traditions or inspired teachers and sages; he inally in the interpretation of art. For Schuon, the
merely takes it as axiomatic that, through the ages, perennial wisdom is the key to understanding the
the Truth has always been available, and has been “transcendent unity of religions”, and in this he has
perceived by those who opened their eyes to it. But been followed notably by the influential contempo-
it has become ever more difficult to do so, for while rary historian of religions Huston Smith.
the Tradition was still integral to the most ancient Clearly, in these and similar contemporary au-
cultures (and now still survives notably in primi- thors as well, we are no longer dealing with
tive, Chinese, Hindu and Islamic ones), a gradual anything that could be defined as “Western esoteri-
process of degeneration has taken place, reaching cism” in the historical sense of the word (see > Eso-
its final and lowest point in the present “Kali Yuga” tericism): Tradition, or perennial philosophy, has
based upon the “reign of quantity” that dominates become an approach to the comparative study of
the modern West: whereas Traditional cultures religions and cultures in general, or even a general
were based upon correct metaphysical principles, philosophical perspective on reality as such. Tradi-
modern Western culture indoctrinates the popula- tion is not a tradition, esoteric or otherwise; it is
tion with values and principles that are the very seen as the true metaphysics than can be found in
antithesis of Tradition. It is not possible to lead the any “authentic” tradition. This has not prevented
world back to Traditional culture by means of some representatives of the “perennialist” or “tra-
reforms; the cycle will have to run its course, after ditionalist” school from writing books about West-
which a fresh one will begin. Those who embrace ern esoteric currents from their perspective;
Traditional values therefore have no other option examples are e.g. Julius Evola’s writings on the her-
than an “inner emigration”, being in the world but metic tradition, Leo Schaya’s book about kabba-
not of it, perhaps in Traditionalist communities lah, or Titus Burckhardt’s studies of alchemy, and
that are like islands of truth in the general sea of one might add here the masonic interests of authors
modernist error. such as e.g. Constant Chevillon and Jean Tourniac.

--- Page 558 ---
TRADITION 1134
But even if some Traditionalists have a more than particularly by Thomas Aquinas. The term has
average interest in at least some Western esoteric even been used in this sense by Pope John Paul II, in
currents, their perspective is applied quite as easily an address to students (‘Address on the Perennial
to e.g. Tibetan Buddhism (e.g. Marco Pallis), Islam Philosophy of St. Thomas for the Youth of Our
(e.g. Seyyed Hossein Nasr) or Christianity (e.g. Times’, Rome, 17 nov. 1979). Probably more widely
Jean Borella). influential has been the book by Aldous Huxley,
The vitality of the perennialist or traditionalist The Perennial Philosophy, first published in 1944.
milieu is reflected in the flourishing of conferences Exemplifying the “rupture” in the transmission of
and colloquia with titles such as “Science and Tra- the term, referred to earlier, Huxley mentioned nei-
dition”, “Tradition and Modernity” and so on, ther Steuco nor any of the Traditionalists, but did
and the publication of quite a number of journals refer to Leibniz, in this study devoted to ‘the meta-
(see details in Faivre 1999, 37, 40f.). In the English physic that recognizes a divine Reality substantial
language alone, one may think of Studies in Com- to the world of things and lives and minds’ as well
parative Religion (1967-1987), Sophia: A Journal as the psychology and ethics related to it.
of Tradition Studies (since 1995), Parabola: The In the wake of Huxley’s book, the vague notion
Magazine of Myth and Tradition (since 1975), and of a “perennial philosophy” has come to enjoy a
Avaloka: A Journal of Traditional Religion and certain vogue in the domains of alternative spiritu-
Culture (since 1986); in other languages there are ality and the > New Age movement. Thus we find
journals like e.g. the Italian Rivista di Studi Tra- that even the notorious Indian guru Bhagwan Shree
dizionali, the Spanish and South-American Axis Rajneesh (now referred to as Osho) has published
Mundi: Cosmologia y pensiamento tradicional, a book (also available as videotape) called Philo-
Symbolos (Arte, Cultura, Gnosis) and Epimelia: sophia Perennis, devoted to a commentary on the
Revista di Estudios sobre la tradicion, and the Golden Verses of Pythagoras. Implicit and partly
French Etudes Traditionnelles and Connaissance explicit belief in a perennial wisdom is widespread
des Religions. The scope of such periodicals goes in the New Age movement (see references to e.g. >
far beyond the domain of Western esotericism; Edgar Cayce, David Bohm, Matthew Fox, Vivianne
rather, selected currents of the latter tend to be Crowley, Caitlin and John Matthews, Stanislav
interpreted in strongly religionist fashion as depos- Grof, Willis Harman, Peter Russell, George
itories or survivals of Traditional wisdom, their Trevelyan, Shirley MacLaine, and the Ramala com-
greatest common denominator (and attraction) munity, in Hanegraaff 1996/1998, 327-330).
being their distance from “modernity”. The same A particularly interesting case, finally, of peren-
common denominator applies to quite a number of nial philosophy in the wake of Huxley is the
influential authors who do not strictly belong to the influential American transpersonal psychologist
Traditionalist current but have been influenced by Ken Wilber. In the earlier phase of his career he
it to some degree; to this group belong e.g. the made many references to his own ideas as a psy-
historian of religions Mircea Eliade, the islam chological application of the philosophia perennis,
scholar > Henry Corbin, the physicist/philosopher understood by him as grounded in “unity con-
Basarab Nicolescu, the philosopher/anthropologist sciousness”, and usually illustrated with examples
Gilbert Durand or the philosopher and writer > from Hinduism and Buddhism (see e.g. Eye to Eye
Raymond Abellio, to mention only a few. [1983], 126-133). In sharp contrast to practically
all traditional understandings of the concept
6. PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY IN (whether in its Renaissance or Traditionalist mani-
GENERAL WESTERN CULTURE festations), but in line with the mainstream of New
Finally, a few words must be said about concepts Age, Wilber sees no contradiction between his be-
of “philosophia perennis” (or clearly related lief in a perennial philosophy and the pronounced
expressions, such as “sophia perennis”) in modern evolutionism typical of all his writings. Any sense
and contemporary Western culture outside the of nostalgia for a lost or diminished world-order of
specific domains of Western esotericism and Tradi- wholeness and truth, present to some degree in all
tionalism. Since the early 2oth century the term has authors and currents discussed above, is rejected by
been in use in neo-thomist or neo-scholastic Roman Wilber as reflecting a Romantic sentimentalism
Catholic circles, inspired by authors such as e.g. that mistakenly looks backwards in search of a lost
Etienne Gilson and Jacques Maritain, where it paradise, instead of aspiring to transcendence as
refers, precisely, to the enduring truth of Roman the final term of the evolution of consciousness. It
Catholic theology and philosophy as expressed is not in the “pre-personal” stage of mere indiffer-

--- Page 559 ---
1135 TRITHEMIUS
entiated fusion but in the “trans-personal” stage of tutes 17 (1954), 204-259 Frances A. Yates, Giordano
integrated wholeness that salvation can be found; Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition, London: Routledge
with this message, the philosophia perennis has & Kegan Paul, 1964, ch. 1.
definitively left the realm of history that has been
our concern here, and entered the domain of the WOUTER J. HANEGRAAFF
mind.
Trithemius, Johannes, * 1.2.1462
Lit.: Michael J.B. Allen, Synoptic Art: Marsilio Ficino Trittenheim, {16.12.1516 Wurzburg
on the History of Platonic Interpretation, Florence:
L.S. Olschki, 1998, 24-47 @ Mariano Crociata, t. LIFE AND WORK 2. THEORY OF MAGIC
Umanesimo e Teologia in Agostino Steuco: Neopla-
3. TRITHEMIUS’S INFLUENCE
tonismo e teologia della creazione nel “De perenni
philosophia”, Rome: Citta Nuova, 1987 @ Karl H.
Dannenfeldt, “The Pseudo-Zoroastrian Oracles in the tr. LIFE AND WORK
Renaissance”, Studies in the Renaissance 4 (1957), 7- Benedictine abbot of St. Martin at Sponheim,
30 @ Walter-Andreas Euler, “Pia philosophia” et 1483-1505, and of St. Jacob at Wiirzburg, 1506-
“docta religio”: Theologie und Religion bei Marsilio 1516. Notable for writings in the fields of monas-
Ficino und Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, Munich: tic instruction, mystical theology, ecclesiastical
Fink, 1998 @ Antoine Faivre, “Histoire de la notion
history, Christian humanism, demonology, and >
moderne de tradition dans ses rapports avec les
magic. In his capacity as a working magician courants ésotériques (XV°-XX° siécles)”, in: Symboles
et Mythes dans les mouvements initiatiques et Trithemius is counted among the pioneers of the art
ésotériques (X VII°-XX° siécles): Filiations et emprunts of cryptography, his foremost contributions in this
(ARIES special issue), Milan/Paris: Arché/La Table area consisting of his uncompleted Steganographia
d’Emeraude, 1999, 7-48 @ idem, Theosophy, Imagina- (c. 1500) and Polygraphia (1508).
tion, Tradition: Studies in Western Esotericism, Following youthful stays in Trier and the Nether-
Albany: State University of New York Press, 2000,
lands, Trithemius settled in Heidelberg for the
171-248 @ idem, Esoterismo e tradizione, Leumann
completion of his formal education. While there he (Torino): Elledici, 1999 # Miguel A. Granada, “Sobre
alcunos aspectos de la concordia entre ‘prisca theolo- fell into company with some of the foremost Ger-
gia’ y cristianismo en Marsilio Ficino, Giovanni Pico y man humanists of his day, among them Conrad
Leon Hebreo”, Daimon 6 (1993), 41-60 @ Arthur Celtis (1459-1508), Jacob Wimpfeling (1450-1528)
McCalla, “Illuminism and French Romantic Philoso- and > Johannes Reuchlin, joining them in forming
phies of History”, in: Antoine Faivre & Wouter J. the Rhenish literary sodality. On assuming the
Hanegraaff (eds.), Western Esotericism and the Science
Sponheim abbacy he transformed his cloister into a
of Religion, Louvain: Peeters, 1998, 253-268 @ Maria
renowned seat of Christian learning containing Muccillo, Platonismo, Ermetismo e “prisca theolo-
gia”: Ricerche di storiografia filosofica rinascimentale, over two thousand handcopied and printed vol-
Florence: Olschki, 1996 # Martin Mulsow (ed.), Das umes. In time, however, resulting from a combina-
Ende des Hermetismus, Tibingen: Mohr Siebeck 2002 tion of the disruptions caused by numerous outside
@ William W. Quinn, The Only Tradition, Albany: visitors and his reputation as a stern taskmaster
SUNY Press, 1997 @ idem, “Tradition: Definition and who busied his charges in the cloister’s scriptorium
Usages”, in: 0.c., 319-328 Wilhelm Schmidt-Bigge-
even as the novel technology of printing was mak-
mann, Philosophia Perennis: Historische Umrisse
ing handcopying anachronistic, Trithemius came abendlandischer Spiritualitat in Antike, Mittelalter
und Friiher Neuzeit, Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp, 1998 into such acerbic conflict with his Sponheim monks
@ Charles B. Schmitt, “Perennial Philosophy: From that he reluctantly severed connection with them
Agostino Steuco to Leibniz”, Journal ofthe History of and his magnificent library. Following temporary
Ideas 27 (1966), 505-532 @ Mark Sedgwick, Against stopovers at Cologne and Berlin as a guest of the
the Modern World: Traditionalism and the Secret margrave-elector Joachim of Brandenburg, Trithe-
Intellectual History of the Twentieth Century, New
mius took up permanent residence in the more aus-
York: Oxford University Press, 2004 @ Michael Staus-
berg, Faszination Zarathushtra: Zoroaster und die tere surroundings of Wirzburg.
Europdische Religionsgeschichte der Friihen Neuzeit, In his monastic and mystical roles Trithemius, an
Berlin/New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1998 # Cesare active participant in the Bursfeld reform move-
Vasoli, “Der Mythos der ‘Prisci Theologi’ als ‘Ideolo- ment, inscribed numerous sermons exhorting
gie’ der ‘Renovatio’”, in: Mulsow, Ende des Her- learned piety and delineated successive stages of
metismus, 17-60 @ D.P Walker, The Ancient Theology: spiritual ascent following guidelines laid down by,
Studies in Christian Platonism from the Fifteenth to the
among others, Jean Gerson (1363-1469) and >
Eighteenth Century, Ithaca, New York: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 1972 @ idem, “The Prisca Theologia in Nicholas of Cusa (1401-1464). In his historiograph-
France”, Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Insti- ical role he composed chronicles, annals, catalogs,

--- Page 560 ---
TRITHEMIUS 1136
biographies, and an autobiography, in which capa- gated the abbot’s necromantic legend. If the unfore-
city, prodded by a zeal to establish hereditary links seen disclosure of the Bostius epistle can be said to
between contemporary Germans and the ancient have delivered the first serious blow to Trithemius’s
Trojans and Druids, he did not demur from fabri- reputation, a second severe blow was inflicted in
cating such ancient chroniclers as Hunibald and the following decade by the French scholar Caro-
Meginfrid. In his humanist role he advocated the lus Bovillus (c. 1479-1553), who, following a 1503
union of eloquence with knowledge, in the further- Sponheim visit in which he was given access to the
ance of which he encouraged linguistic skills in partially completed Steganographia, condemned
Latin, Greek and Hebrew. It is, however, in his its author in a widely circulated letter as a diaboli-
demonological and magical roles that Trithemius cally inspired sorcerer.
most famously has come to the attention of succes- Instead of deterring Trithemius from his excur-
sive generations. sions into the arcana as might be expected, the
According to a story put into circulation soon uproar incited by the Bostius and Bovillus affairs
after his death Trithemius was once summoned to rather had the effect of motivating him to enlarge
the court of Emperor Maximilian I (1459-1519) on and sharpen his theoretical justification of
where, in a dramatic demonstration of his necro- magic. Notable testimonies to this response are
mantic powers, he conjured from the dead, to- found in a defense of magic inserted by Trithemius
gether with sundry ancient heroes, Maximilian’s into his autobiographical Nepiachus (1507), exten-
deceased wife Mary of Burgundy. That a compara- sive prefaces to his Steganographia and follow-up
ble feat was contemporaneously ascribed to a cer- Polygraphia — the latter purged of the suspect plan-
tain Doctor Faustus (c. 1480-c. 1540) at the court etary-angelic system of cryptic mediation, and
of Maximilian’s grandson Charles V (1500-1558) lengthy explicative epistles to selected correspon-
was not lost to the demonological critics of both dents. Trithemius’s histories in turn furnished
men. It apparently did not help his case that, in the sundry anecdotal illustrations for fleshing out his
first documented evidence of the historical person- occult principles on the stage of everyday life. Also
age behind the Faustus legend, Trithemius pre- interlocking his occult with his historiographical
sented a highly unflattering epistolary portrait of methods was a willingness on his part to counter-
its subject. For despite Trithemius’s efforts to dis- feit ancient sources for the buttressing of his postu-
tinguish between his own divinely sanctioned lates. For much as Trithemius’s “discovery” of
magic and the illicit magic of Faustus, he subse- Hunibald and Meginfrid in his histories has subse-
quently accrued a diabolical legend of his own quently proved to be spurious, so can that of a
resembling that of Faustus. What decisively sepa- certain ancient cryptographer Menastor in his
rates Trithemius’s legend from its Faustian ana- exposition of steganography.
logue is that, whereas Faustus did not leave behind While appearing to emphasize methods of exor-
so much asa written word about the motivation for cism more than the inculpation of sorcerers in his
his magical interests, depending for that on others demonological treatises, Trithemius nevertheless
incorporating it into their own agendas, Trithemius bears responsibility for encouraging the witch per-
bequeathed a formidable scholarly corpus docu- secutions [> Witchcraft]. His Antipalus malefi-
menting his own motivation. ciorum (1508), select entries in his Liber octo
Until 1499 Trithemius’ reputation rested prima- questionum (1508) addressed to Emperor Maxim-
rily on his monastic, mystical and humanist writ- ilian, and a preface and outline for a projected
ings. Then, in that year, his magical notoriety burst encyclopedia of demons — all establish Trithemius’s
onto the historical stage like a lightning bolt, sig- positioning as an unabashed apologist for the
naled by a 1499 letter to a Carmelite friend, Arnold witch hunts. Echoing a misogynist bias character-
Bostius (1445-1499), announcing the birth of the izing a prior treatise on this subject, the Malleus
art of steganography, a form of cryptography maleficarum (1484), Trithemius was in no danger
ostensibly invoking angels for the conveyance of of confusing the sorcery of illiterate female witches
secret messages. Far from having himself invented with his own interests in occult subjects. The same
the art therein described, Trithemius assured Bos- cannot be said, however, for his unfavorable por-
tius, he had been instructed in its principles through trayal of many learned male magicians, among
a divine revelation. Inasmuch as the intended recip- them > Simon Magus and Apollonius of Tyana
ient had deceased prior to the letter’s arrival, the (rst cent. A.D) in ancient times and > Giovanni
prior of his cloister gained access to its contents Mercurio da Correggio and Faustus in his own
and, aghast at what he therein encountered, insti- day.

--- Page 561 ---
E37, TRITHEMIUS
2, PARORY<O FsMAG requisites of his occult methodology. The first req-
Central to Trithemius’s critique of illicit magic is uisite was to explain why the motive for his magi-
a radical distinction, with such revered prior au- cal inquiries had been misunderstood by uninitiated
thorities as St. >»Augustine and St. Thomas Aqui- critics, and the second requisite, to furnish a her-
nas to back him up, between miracle and magic. meneutic device for protecting the soul of the initi-
When entering into the arcana on his own, how- ated from contamination by the demons and their
ever, with such ancient “pre-Christian” sources as human confederates, the witches and sorcerers.
the Greek Pythagoras, the Egyptian > Hermes The astrological and angelogical backdrop for
Trismegistus, and Hebrew kabbalah [> Jewish Trithemius’s occult theory is set forth in his De
Influences] as his guides, he effectively reformulated septem secundeis (1508), the celestial scheme of
the miracle-magic relationship bequeathed through which, adopted from - Peter of Abano, establishes
the Augustinian-Thomist legacies. St. Augustine a repetitive succession of cosmic-historical cycles
and St. Thomas had vehemently condemned magic governed in turn by seven “secondary intelli-
in principle as a demonic instrument intended to gences”, so-called because they are held to rule
lure souls into the Devil’s service by feigning true under the supervision of the “First Intelligence”,
miracles. Trithemius, on the other hand, in keeping God the Creator. Adopting the names of these rul-
with a medieval tradition of ritual magic, dis- ing powers from kabbalah, Trithemius identified
tinguished between a diabolically sponsored uti- them in hierarchical order as Orifiel in the sphere of
lization of magic geared to submerge souls in the Saturn, Anael in the sphere of Venus, Zachariel in
demon-infested world and a divinely sponsored the sphere ofJupiter, Raphael in the sphere of Mer-
utilization of magic geared to lift the human soul cury, Samael in the sphere of Mars, Gabriel in the
above the demon-infested world. Put another way, sphere of the moon, and Michael in the sphere
Trithemius’s aim was to transform the Hermetic of the sun. According to the chronological scheme
magnum miraculum into a magnum miraculum presented by Trithemius each planetary angel is
Christianum. appointed to rule for an interval of 354 years and
Trithemius’s express object in his occult writings, four months, with the seven-interval cycles repeated
facilitated by the three ancient languages of Latin, in continuous revolutions until they are apocalyp-
Greek, and Hebrew promoted by the Christian tically terminated.
humanist movement, was to chart a way, through By this scheme Trithemius not only envisaged a
magical means, to the same unobstructed vision of cosmological context for the discernment of pat-
God — the so-called Beatific Vision — which tradi- terns of history, but also, by extending those his-
tional mystical theology assigned to the culminat- torical patterns beyond the present, rationalized
ing stages of spiritual ascent. In keeping with his the possibility of accurately predicting the future.
mystical-magical program Trithemius conceived a The supposition guiding this tract, like his affiliated
series of meditative stages leading from the bounds historical writings, was that prophecy is an ex-
of finite nature to the boundless realm of God, tension of history into the future, and, conversely,
with the occult sciences [> occult/occultism] facili- history is consummated prophecy. Of the more
tating ascent comprised of Hermetic alchemical intriguing passages in this regard, one near the
[> alchemy] and natural magic, > astrology, close of the tract, addressed to the third rule of
Pythagorean numerology [> Number Symbolism], Martial Samael assigned to Trithemius’s own time,
Neoplatonic [~ Neoplatonism] spirit-magic and foretells an imminent religious schism suggestive of
kabbalah. Distinguishing “true astrology” from a the impending Protestant reformation.
false look-alike denying freedom of the will, Tri- Following the identical cosmic scheme, signify-
themius placed it in the service of “true alchemy” ing an inner linkage between his cosmographical
as presented in the Hermetic Emerald Table. He in and steganographical operations, Trithemius con-
turn, in several epistolary expositions of his occult ceived of a system of angelic mediators for the con-
theory, coalesced his astrological and alchemical veyance of his cryptographical communications. In
precepts with Pythagorean numerological and kab- the furtherance of his steganographical objectives
balistic ones geared to direct the soul of the magus, he subordinated to the seven planetary angels two
as he put it, from the worldly finite to the divinely subservient realms of spirits, the first comprised of
infinite realms. Guiding each purgative step in the 31 regional or district spirits ruling over as many
ascent to mystical-magical illumination for Trithe- domains or mansions, and the second comprised of
mius was the rule of esoteric > secrecy, a principle 24 temporal spirits ruling over the hours. In addi-
in his mind simultaneously fulfilling two cardinal tion he subjected to the regional and temporal

--- Page 562 ---
TRITHEMIUS 1138
angels a multitude of subsidiary angelic attendants goal, to wit, the conveyance of the magician’s soul
likewise accessible to steganographical invocations. from earth to Heaven.
Planetary harmony, Trithemius was persuaded, is
the outward celestial manifestation of the inward 3. TRITHEMIUS’S INFLUENCE
occult harmony suffusing and binding all things; Finding an apt precursor and alter ego in his Ger-
hence, he reasoned, the magus, to gain access to the man predecessor ~ Albertus Magnus, Trithemius
inner workings of nature, must also gain access to claimed among his own more notable disciples >
the planetary spheres and to the secondary intelli- Agrippa of Nettesheim, who dedicated the first edi-
gences ruling over them. tion of his De occulta philosophia (1510) to the
As testified by the 1499 expository letter to abbot. Although a widely promulgated report that
Bostius and the later attack on Trithemius’s magic Trithemius had tutored > Paracelsus in the arcana
by Bovillus, the magical abbot’s detractors pointed is not so easily verifiable, there is no question that
principally to his steganographical methods, ex- various subsequent representatives of the Paracel-
plicitly invoking the assistance of the planetary sian movement [> Paracelsianism], among them >
angels and their regional and temporal subordi- Jacques Gohory (= Leo Suavius, ¢ 1576) and >
nates as evidence for his sorcerous intentions. His Gérard Dorn (16th cent.), elaborated on the
strategy in warding off such attacks consisted not precepts of their master under that working
only of distinguishing what he held to be his licit assumption. Across the channel > John Dee ex-
natural and angel magic from the illicit magic he pressly credited Trithemius, following a chance dis-
had so strenuously condemned in his demonologi- covery of a manuscript copy of the Steganographia
cal writings. It also consisted of shifting focus to a while on a diplomatic assignment to Antwerp in
less suspect form of cryptography, termed polygra- 1563, with stimulating the composition of his
phy, the enigmas of which, with the help of a key he kabbalah-inspired Monas hieroglyphica (1564). It
himself furnished, were expressly decipherable in was, however, through his occult specialties of
linguistic terms free of angelic trappings. Tracing steganography and polygraphy that Trithemius
its origins to the ancient world, foretokened by exercised the most patent and durable impact on
Egyptian hieroglyphics, Trithemius counted among future generations — a legacy which, while still
its more prominent ancient gentile practitioners, exercising influence on modern day enciphering
together with the spurious “Menastor”, Archi- practices, found in the two centuries following his
medes, Cicero, and Augustus Caesar. As for its death its most outspoken and sustained train of
more prominent early Christian practitioners, Tri- emulators. Among the more expressly indebted
themius cited among them St. Cyprian, the Vene- beneficiaries of Trithemius’s cryptic methods dur-
rable Bede, and, serving as a prime paradigm for ing this period, all presenting prefaces to their rele-
Maximilian’s benefit, Charlemagne. vant tracts attesting to the abbot’s pious intentions,
As the preface to the resulting Polygraphia makes were Sigismund of Seeon (+ 1634); Duke August II
clear, the shift in methodology between the two of Braunschweig-Liineburg under the pseudonym
forms of cryptography, steganography and polygra- Gustavus Selenus (1579-1666); Juan Caramuel
phy, in no way meant a shift away from the theory y Lobkowitz (1606-1682); and Wolfgang Ernst
of magic undergirding their practical applications. Heidel (¢ 1721).
If it can be viably maintained that Trithemius’s Complicating the course of Trithemius’s posthu-
annexation of a key to his steganographical tract mous reputation is the fact that he presented in his
bolsters a fully linguistic analysis of his codes and demonological writings the same kinds of argu-
ciphers along the same lines as those guiding his ments as have been leveled against him by many of
polygraphical operations, it can equally be averred his critics. The posthumous debate surrounding his
that his polygraphy as fully as his steganography name understandably intersected not only with the
was directed to higher spiritual ends commensu- witch hunts which he helped to foster, but also with
rate with those spelled out in his mystical theology. Reformation polemics and the unfolding scientific
In his polygraphical as in his steganographical the- revolution. Whereas Protestant critics tended to
ory Trithemius made clear his belief that magic, perceive a connection between Trithemius’s magic
while having the kinds of practical applications and his “superstitious” Catholic beliefs and monas-
that made it appealing to such secular patrons as tic way of life and Catholic critics tended to view
Emperor Maximilian, Count-Elector Philip of the his magic as a well-meaning but errant excursus
Palatinate, and Margrave-Elector Joachim of Bran- from an otherwise impeccable career in the promo-
denburg, at bottom is aimed at a transmundane tion of learned piety, Protestants and Catholics

--- Page 563 ---
1139 UFO TRADITIONS
alike could be found to make use of his cryptologi- credentials as being on the cutting edge of modern
cal methods, and even to enlarge on them, with the techniques in the art of encoding and enciphering.
practical intent of hiding their true thoughts from
the uninitiated. And whereas some receptive to the De septem secundeis, id est, intelligenttis, sive spt-
emerging currents of philosophical rationalism took ritibus orbes post Deum moventibus libellus sive
Chronologia mystica, Cologne: apud Ioannem Birck-
Trithemius to task for engaging in what they char-
mannum, 1567 @ Polygraphiae libri VI, Basel:
acterized as superstition, others, including such M. Furter, 1518; Cologne: apud Joannem Birckman-
admiring members of the English Royal Society num & Theodorum Baumium, 1571; Strassburg:
as John Wilkins (1614-1672) and Robert Hooke sumptibus Lazari Zetzneri, 1600 Steganographia,
(1635-1703), praised Trithemius’s cryptological hoc est, ars per occultam scripturam animi sui volun-
techniques even as they rejected the occult princi- tatem absentibus aperiendi certa, Frankfurt/Main: ex
officina typographica Matthiae Beckeri, sumptibus
ples on which they were based. The trend among
Joannis Berneri, 1605, 1608, 1621; partial English edi-
these was to present the abbot as a pioneer in their
tion: The Steganographia of Johannes Trithemius,
campaign to produce a universal cryptic language Adam McLean (ed.), Fiona Tait, Christopher Upton
to complement that of mathematics, commensu- and J.W.H. Walden (trans.), Edinburgh: Magnum
rate, as it were, with their quest for a universally Opus Hermetic Sourceworks, 1982 @ Paralipomena
valid scientific method. opusculorum Petri Blenensis et Ioannis Trithemii,
Following the latter strategy, the trend has been Johannes Busaeus (ed.), Cologne: apud Ioannem Wolf-
fraht, 1624 @ De demonibus (proemium and chapter
to convert Trithemian cryptology from an esoteric
headings), in: Klaus Arnold, “Additamenta Trithe-
discipline based on ancient occult theory to an exo- miana: Nachtrage zu Leben und Werk des Johannes
teric discipline of language independent of occult Trithemius, insbesondere zur Schrift De demonibus”,
theory. Until recently the task of reducing Trithe- Wiirzburger Didzesan-Geschichtblatter 37-38 (1975),
mian cryptic methods to wholly linguistic terms 256-67.
has been impeded by the resistance of the third,
unfinished book of the Steganographia to a crypto- Lit.: Klaus Arnold, Johannes Trithemius (1462-1516),
Wurzburg: Kommissionsverlag Ferdinand Schoningh,
logical solution. That obstacle, with the help of the
1971; 2nd ed., revised, 1991 @ David Kahn, The Code-
computer, having now been overcome (see bibliog- breakers: The Story of Secret Writing, New York:
raphy), the way would now seem clear to sever the Scribner, 1967; 2nd ed., revised, 1996 @ Noel L. Brann,
cryptographic techniques invented by Trithemius The Abbot Trithemius (1462-1516): The Renaissance
from the theoretical precepts on which they are of Monastic Humanism, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1981 @
ostensibly founded. However, while Trithemius’s idem, Trithemius and Magical Theology: A Chapter in
the Controversy over Occult Studies in Early Modern
steganographic methods are now established to be
Europe, Albany: SUNY, 1999 @ Richard Auernheimer
radically free of a need for angelic-astrological and Frank Baron (eds.), Johannes Trithemius: Huma-
mediation, still left intact is an underlying theolog- nismus und Magie im vorreformatorischen Deutsch-
ical motive for their contrivance. For as the preface land (Bad Kreuznache Symposien I), Munich: Profil,
to the Polygraphia equally establishes, the every- 1991 @ Thomas Ernst, “Schwarzweisse Magie: Der
day practicability of cryptography was conceived Schliissel zum dritten Buch der Steganographia des
Trithemius”, Daphnis: Zeitschrift fiir Mittlere Deutsche
by Trithemius as but a secular consequent of the
Literatur 25 (1996), 1-205 @ Jim Reeds, “Solved: The
ability of a soul specially empowered by God to Ciphers in Book III of Trithemius’s Steganographia”,
reach, by magical means, from earth to Heaven. Cryptologia 12 (1998), 291-317.
In his pursuit of the infinitely removed heavenly
realm Trithemius openly favored the will over the NOEL L. BRANN
intellect, a bias conditioning his mystical theology
before it was restated as a basic guideline of its UFO traditions
derivative magical theology. While freely admitting
to its practical application, Trithemius conceived of Among contemporary religious and esoteric
his magical specialty, cryptography, as at bottom a phenomena, there are some which seem so closely
spiritual instrument intended to assist the soul of associated with modern ideas and themes that it
the adept in achieving eternal bliss. Through this might be considered premature to associate them
underlying incentive behind his magic, the name of with a word like “tradition”, evocative of some-
Trithemius has come to occupy a place of honor at thing with roots in a relatively long past. The eso-
the table of modern theosophy. Just as significant teric currents associated with UFOs (Unidentified
for posterity, however, are the practical applications Flying Objects) represent such a case. The emer-
of his cryptological speculations, establishing his gence of the “flying saucer” phenomenon is usually

--- Page 564 ---
UFO TRADITIONS 1140
associated with Kenneth Arnold’s (1915-1984) tactee”: while his reports do not belong to the
sightings in June 1947. However, research done category of literary utopias or fantastic voyage
over the past decades has clearly shown that the novels, neither did he claim to have travelled to
UFO theme existed already earlier: certain pre- other planets in his physical body aboard some
1947 books of fiction contain most of the ele- spaceship or to have spoken with extraterrestrial
ments subsequently associated with manifestations entities descended to Earth for bringing some mes-
of extraterrestrial entities, including the physical sage. Rather, he claimed to have spoken with spir-
shape of the spaceships. As has been demonstrated its and angels who lived on those other planets,
by Bertrand Méheust, a number of novels pub- having been transported there in the spirit while his
lished between 1880 and 1945 had developed body remained on our Earth. Still, his style of writ-
an approach which “technologized magic” and ing is not unlike contemporary travel reports, in
“resacralized technology”, thus creating features which an explorer depicts exotic civilizations. The
from which the UFO myth would extensively bor- extraterrestrials turn out to have human forms,
row. Moreover, and of direct relevance for issues even if they may have some peculiar features: for
dealt with here, groups of UFO believers did not instance, the residents of Venus are giants. Interest-
appear out of the blue, but received much of their ingly, Swedenborg explains that there are also
inspiration from the occult milieu [> occult/ inhabited planets outside our solar system, and
occultism], with which a number of “contactees” claims to have met some of their representatives
were actually familiar. An adequate overview of as well. In any case, none of these extraterrestrials
UFO beliefs therefore needs to trace their pre- are presented as messengers of a new religious
1947 roots. doctrine: Swedenborg’s universe is Christocentric,
The prehistory of the UFO traditions probably and Ernst Benz has even suggested that Sweden-
begins around the 18th century, and as observed borg was a pioneer in the elaboration of a cosmic
by Gordon Melton, ~ Emanuel Swedenborg can be Christology.
considered an appropriate point of departure. Several other philosophers commented on the
Some of Swedenborg’s theological treatises have plurality of the worlds in their works. Among the
occasionally been a source of embarrassment even recipients of new revelations, Lorber received
for the Swedish seer’s most fervent admirers, and dictations about the Moon, Saturn and their
De Telluribus in Mundo nostro Solari (Earth in the inhabitants, which are still read with interest by
Universe) is an obvious case. Did not Swedenborg some UFO believers today, especially in German-
claim to have spoken with spirits of the Moon speaking countries. But most important for the
and of other planets? Most of the content of this emergence of the UFO tradition was the current of
treatise can actually be found in Swedenborg’s 19th century > Spiritualism. If one reads the Revue
Arcana Caelestia, but the fact that Swedenborg spirite published in Paris from 1858, it is easy to
also published it as a separate volume indicates discover, from its very first year of publication, arti-
that he attributed some particular importance cles mentioning the plurality of worlds. It dealt
to it. And in this he was not alone: Earths in the with such topics because communications received
Universe was actually the first of his books trans- by several mediums confirmed the existence of liv-
lated and published into German (by > Friedrich ing beings on other planets; the acknowledgement
Christoph Oetinger, 1770), and four German edi- of the plurality of inhabitated worlds was therefore
tions appeared during Swedenborg’s lifetime. It widespread in Spiritualism from its very first years.
was also one of the first volumes translated into Spiritualism offered the possibility to get in touch
French (by > Pernety in 1782). If the treatise has with other planets without needing a spaceship.
embarrassed late 20th century Swedenborgians, As with Swedenborg, there is definitely a fascina-
during the 18th century it was seen, on the con- tion with the exotic: undoubtedly it is not just by
trary, as a rather attractive approach to solving the chance that the medium Elise Miller, alias Héléne
riddle of the plurality of the worlds. Swedenborg Smith (1861-1929) — who was closely examined
was not alone in his speculations about inhabitants in Geneva at the end of the roth century by the
of other worlds: his famous critic, Immanuel Kant renowned psychologist Théodore Flournoy (185 4-
(1724-1804), not only seriously considered the 1920) and described in his book Des Indes a la
hypothesis that there could be human beings on planéte Mars (1900) — reported about civilization
other planets, but even the possibility that they on Mars in one series of communications, and had
might be places of residence for people from Earth India as the background of another series; the pop-
in future incarnations after their present life. ularity of spirits of American Indians among some
However, Swedenborg was not the first “con- mediums is a well-known phenomenon as well.

--- Page 565 ---
L141 UFO TRADITIONS
Spiritualism thus offered unlimited venues for Mars, and have therefore at various times tried
discovering exotic cultures and exploring unknown to manifest themselves through mediums at spiri-
territories. But from a doctrinal perspective, there tual seances, or have been able, by the methods
was more at stake. According to the Spiritualist which they have learnt, to impress their ideas
school led by -> Allan Kardec (1803-1869), the plu- upon poets and novelists’. Here we have a hint
rality of worlds and the plurality of existences about a possible role of extraterrestrials not just
were closely related: human beings incarnate suc- as beings who obligingly reply to inquisitive medi-
cessively on different planets in accordance with ums, but as agents who take deliberate action
different levels of spiritual evolution. Such views to deliver selected information to their terrestrial
opened grandiose perspectives on an interplane- counterparts. Leadbeater’s suggestion that such
tary brotherhood. And it may be more than a information could be transmitted through fictional
coincidence that the famous French astronomer literature as well is worth noticing, since some
Camille Flammarion (1842-1925) was also associ- UFO enthusiasts continue to hold such beliefs even
ated with the Spiritualist movement. Even though today: for instance, members of the American
he eventually admitted that Spiritualism had group Heaven’s Gate (who committed suicide in
brought him no new knowledge in the field March 1997) considered popular science fiction
of astronomy, early in his life he had published entertainment series as valuable sources of infor-
a book titled La pluralité des mondes habités mation and explained that ‘the context of fiction
(1862), in which he declared his belief that people can often open the mind to advanced possibilities
on other planets in space belong to ‘our immense which are, in reality, quite close to fact’.
human family’, and stated that ‘The doctrine of the But there was more to the Theosophical Society
plurality of the worlds has led us to the gates of a than Leadbeater’s astral scouting into other
religious belief built upon the real system of the worlds. > Blavatsky’s elaborate system could obvi-
world’. In a later work, Les terres du ciel (1877), ously not limit itself to only this Earth: ‘Every
however, he speculated that residents of other plan- celestial body in space, of whatever kind or type,
ets were likely to be completely different from what is under the overseeing and directing influence of
we are, and possibly had forms we were not even a Hierarchy of spiritual and quasi-spiritual and
able to imagine. astral beings’. Most of the planets inside as well as
Spiritualism did not exist in isolation: it fre- outside our solar system are inhabitated by human
quently tended to interact with other alternative beings. Similar to Kardecist teachings, each planet
worldviews, as one can see from the list of partici- corresponds to an evolutionary stage in mankind’s
pants and topics dealt with at Spiritualist inter- progress. Most important of all, Theosophical
national congresses. Thus, the ~ Theosophical teachings are said to go back to a visitation of
Society obviously could not remain immune from our Earth by “Adepts” from Venus. The careful
the interest for other worlds. In his book The Inner research conducted by Wiktor Stoczkowski has
Life (1910-1911), ~ Leadbeater described the shown how the ultimate roots of the Ancient
‘present conditions of the planet Mars’ as ‘by no Astronaut theory — according to which the origins
means unpleasant’, and not overcrowded; the of mankind and of civilization go back to extrater-
Martians, he explained, ‘are not unlike ourselves, restrial intervention — can be found in Blavatsky’s
except that they are considerably smaller’ — once doctrines and cannot be understood without that
again, we find a perception of extraterrestrials as preexisting occult milieu. As this French anthro-
basically human or humanoid beings. Leadbeater’s pologist has correctly observed, this does not
work also reads somewhat like the description of mean that advocates of the Ancient Astronaut
an utopia: ‘it is the custom to hand over all the chil- theory have read Blavatsky’s works in depth: due to
dren to the State at a very early age to be reared and the numerous and diverse posterity (legitimate or
educated’, ‘they have absolutely no religion. .., otherwise) of the Theosophical Society, Theosoph-
nothing is true but what can be scientifically ical teachings have had such widespread influence
demonstrated’. Leadbeater did not claim to have that its basic ideas can become familiar even to
physically traveled to Mars: astral travel could those who have not been in direct contact with
obviously do the same job. Most interesting is his Theosophical literature.
mention of the existence of a secret society on that Venusian Masters returned to the scene with
planet, whose members had developed ‘a good deal Guy Warren Ballard (1878-1939) and his > “I
of power’: ‘Some at least of the members of the AM” Activity. Published in 1934 under the pen
secret society have learnt how to cross without name of “Godfré Ray King”, his Unveiled Myster-
great difficulty the space which separates us from ies culminate in the narrative of an assembly of

--- Page 566 ---
UFO TRADITIONS 142
Masters at a mysterious American retreat, welcom- part of the book, written by a co-author. Adamski
ing visitors from Venus ‘robed in white scintillating insisted that one should not make a religious belief
garments, surpassing all powers of description’: out of UFOs; but this did not prevent him from
‘Their brilliant, piercing, violet-blue eyes were publishing a Science of Life Study Course (1964),
beautiful and fascinating’. The Venusians were based upon teachings supposedly delivered to him
obviously much more advanced than the people of by the Venusians. Especially interesting is the fact
Earth, for Ballard and his family were allegedly that Adamski re-used materials he had already
given the opportunity to take a first glimpse at published many years before his alleged contact
‘tremendous’ Venusian inventions which ‘will come with UFOs: the title of that earlier book had been
into use on earth in the Golden Crystal Age we Wisdom of the Masters of the Far East (1936),
have now entered’. While it may be going some- connected with Adamski’s launching in the 1930s
what too far, as some scholars have done, to claim of a “Royal Order of Tibet”. In his 1964 work,
that “I AM” was the first religious movement built Adamski replaced the words “Royal Order of
on contact with extraterrestrials (in fact it was Tibet” by “Space Brothers”. In the 1930s, he
mainly built on contacts with “Masters”, follow- claimed to have lived as a child in Tibetan monas-
ing the pattern of the Theosophical Society, while teries and — while preaching an eclectic universal-
transforming it), it has definitely some features ist doctrine very far from anything Tibetan — he
which would become part of the subsequent UFO had explained to the Los Angeles Times (8 April
religions: the description of attractive, handsome 1934) that he had ‘learned great truths up there on
extraterrestrials, with piercing eyes, evoking the idea the roof of the world’. What matters is not the
of divine messengers; the superiority of the extra- obvious fact that Adamski —- who had also pub-
terrestrial; and their message of relief and salvation lished a novel in 1949 called Pioneers of Space: A
for the Earth, which will be able to overcome its Trip to the Moon, Mars and Venus — was a fraud,
predicaments thanks to the extraordinary techno- but that he had a previous career in the alternative
logical knowledge brought from other worlds. religious milieu, and how easy it was for him to just
After the 1947 sightings, it did not take long for continue propagating the same views in a new,
the first contactees to emerge. While the impor- extraterrestrial garb.
tance of the occult milieu in relation to this devel- Not all contactees claimed to have physically
opment is emphasized here, it should be clear that met extraterrestrials. George W. Van Tassel (i910-
there were other dimensions involved as well. 1978), one of the early contactees, originally
When one reads the literature of UFO believers in claimed to have been in psychic contact with
the late 1940s, it is striking to see how the “things beings from other worlds since 1952. It was only at
seen in the sky” (+ C.G. Jung) are constantly asso- a later point, in 1953, that he reportedly was
ciated with the nuclear threat: the extraterrestrials allowed to enter a flying saucer. Since mediums had
were manifesting themselves in order to warn already been transmitting information about life
mankind of the risk of self-destruction (and possi- on other planets long before the popular wave of
bly to evacuate those deemed worthy to escape, in flying saucers began, it is not surprising that some
case annihilation could not be prevented). While mediums now began to channel messages from
equipped with superior technology, the entities extraterrestrials; in fact, such messages became
from other worlds were seen as much wiser than increasingly common during the 1950s. As Ell-
human beings in their use of it. In any case, there wood and several other scholars have observed,
are strong reasons to assume that the UFO myth religious belief in UFOs and Spiritualism are of the
would not have unfolded the way it did without same type: ‘Both presuppose an order of spiritually
the horror of Hiroshima at the end of World War II. significant beings between the human and ultimate
Flying Saucers Have Landed was the title of a reality, with which one can have conversational
book published in 1953, in which George Adamski and disciplic relationships. ... interaction with
(1891-1965) claimed to have met a being from them opens up a sense of expanded consciousness
Venus, in November 1952. Significantly, from the and cosmic wonder. . . . In both there are physical
very beginning the Venusian made it clear to phenomena or “traces” which serve to support
Adamski that concern about atomic weapons was belief, but which for real believers are like “signs”
the reason for the extraterrestrials to contact in a religious sense... .’. This does not mean that
earth. The Venusian provenience is worth noticing all mediums began enthusiastically to received
as well: it remains on the line of the Theosophical communications from extraterrestrials: it has been
inheritance, and actually there are several direct observed that the ‘adoption of extraterrestrials as
references to Theosophical literature in the first spirit guides is much more prevalent among ~ New

--- Page 567 ---
1143 UFO TRADITIONS
Age channelers than among traditional Spiritual- Although the connections should by now be
ists’ (Porter). clear enough, UFO religious groups have often
As could be expected, contactees — psychic or developed into more than just a variation on gen-
otherwise — incorporated a number of previously- eral occult teachings. Rather, they have amalga-
held beliefs. Extraterrestrial contact became one mated some elements from esoteric traditions
more step in an occult career. A well-known case is with other beliefs, very often including a millenar-
the group led by Dorothy Martin, alias Sister The- ian message, since, as we have already seen, extra-
dra (¢ 1992): not very large or influential in itself, terrestrials do not just come in order to share
it was the subject of a famous book by three Amer- some inspired wisdom, but also to preserve human-
ican sociologists, When Prophecy Fails (1956). ity from impending threats. Thus they could be
Martin had been acquainted with occult teach- described as modern religions of salvation. A good
ings as early as in the 1930s, became involved in example are the mediums and groups claiming to
Dianetics [> Scientology], and was fascinated by receive messages from Ashtar, Commander of a
the teachings of “I AM”, before she herself began fleet of spaceships sent by the Galactic Federation
to receive messages from Sananda (Jesus in an in order to rescue Earth. With a number of these
earlier incarnation), now a resident of the planet mediums — not necessarily connected with each
Clarion. In the typical style of UFOs’ warnings other — Ashtar’s messages have taken a decidedly
about impending disasters, in August 1954 she catastrophic tone: disasters are likely to occur
received a message informing the world that within the near future, but the chosen ones will
cataclysmic changes would soon change the face be rescued. One can see here an obvious influ-
of America and other continents, while the lost ence from premillenial dispensationalist scenarios,
continent of Mu would rise again before the end according to which a “rapture” will take place in
of that same year. The failure of this prophecy did order to spare the elect from having to go through
not prevent her from continuing her activities for the “Great Tribulation”: Ashtar’s “Evacuation” is
the rest of her life, and founding the “Association a transparent adaptation of the rapture to a UFO
of Sananda and Sanat Kumara” in 1965. based scenario. This shows that UFO beliefs do
Another good example of interaction between not necessarily have to build upon themes from
UFO belief and the occult milieu was George King esoteric traditions only, but may quite as easily
(1919-1997), founder of the Aetherius Society borrow elements from the Christian tradition —
(referring to the name of a Venusian Master). He or any other one. In Italy, Giorgio Bongiovanni
came ‘from a family imbued with occult inclina- (b. 1963) declares to have received from the Virgin
tions’ (his mother was a psychic and clairvoyant) in Fatima the stigmatas of Christ, first on his
and had himself developed a keen interest in the hands (1989) and later on his forehead (1993);
occult and yoga, before he was contacted in 1954 and at the same time he poses as a spiritual suc-
by a Cosmic Master and was called to become the cessor of the Sicilian contactee Eugenio Siragusa
“Voice of the Interplanetary Parliament”. King ref- (b. 1919), despite the latter’s disavowal. Certain
ered to the Great White Brotherhood, to Adepts Christian groups have incorporated UFO themes
and to a whole range of terms typical of the Theo- as well. One example was Father Michel Colin
sophical current — while mixing them in a quite (1905-1974), who claimed to be the Pope, assumed
eclectic way with elements taken from a number the pontifical name of Clement XV and created a
of other systems with which he was familiar. Renovated Catholic Church; he spoke about
Among UFO religious groups, the Aetherius Soci- “interplanetary” beings and told his faithful that
ety represents one of the most obvious derivations the elect would be taken to Planet Mary. Some
from Theosophy — Theosophical Adepts being Danish followers of Adamski felt attracted toward
transformed into “Cosmic Masters” or “Gods Clement XV.
from Space”. In some cases, like Ashtar (see below), Groups of believers in UFOs will frequently
the multiplication of newly-revealed entities leads borrow from esoteric themes and sometimes be
to the creation of a ‘pantheon consist[ing] of a completely immersed in the occult milieu, but
wide range of gods, goddesses, and spiritual they do not necessarily have to. For instance, the
masters from various planets’, Ashtar and Sananda Raelian Movement — at this moment the largest
siding together with “Lady Athena” as a kind UFO group worldwide, most other UFO groups
of new Trinity (Wojcik). This is not unlike Ballard’s having remained quite small — holds a materialistic
“JT AM”, with its many Masters. Ellwood has worldview and has little to do with esotericism
suggested that UFO beliefs could also be seen as in any form. The founders of Heaven’s Gate had
a reinvention of polytheism. been familiar with Spiritualist and Theosophical

--- Page 568 ---
UFO TRADITIONS 1144
doctrines, but they finally construed a doctrine Michel Moutet, 1983 # Massimo Introvigne, Heaven's
which to a large extent drew its inspiration from Gate: Il paradiso non puo attendere, Turin: Editrice
Elle Di Ci, 1997 # James R. Lewis (ed.), The GodsChristian mythology (admittedly with major revi-
Have Landed: New Religions from Other Worlds,
sions). UFOs seen as celestial saviors can adjust to
Albany: SUNY Press, 1995 # Jean-Frangois Mayer, Les
a variety of theological backgrounds and develop Nouvelles Voies spirituelles: Enquéte sur la religiosité
into new religious beliefs: due to the classical asso- paralléle en Suisse, Lausanne: VAge d’ Homme, 1993,
ciation between the sky and transcendence, the 239-266 Bertrand Méheust, Science-fiction et sou-
sheer fact that UFOs are seen in the sky can easily coupes volantes, Paris: Mercure de France, 1978 @
endow them with religious connotations. UFOs idem, Soucoupes volantes et folklore, Paris: Mercure
de France, 1985 @ Stephen D. O’Leary, “Heaven’s Gate
come from heaven, extraterrestrials seem omnis-
and the Culture of Popular Millenialism”, Millenial
cient, they are close to perfection or at least much
Stew (Center for Millenial Studies, Boston) 1:1 (1998),
more advanced than people of the Earth, they offer 1-5 @ Susan J. Palmer, I Raeliani, Turin: Editrice Elle Di
salvation from man-made disasters threatening Ci, 2000 @ Ted Peters, UFOs — God’s Chariots? Flying
to destroy our planet: as observed by Ted Peters, Saucers in Politics, Science and Religion, John Knox
these are covert religious structures which can Press: Atlanta 1977 Ted Peters, “UFOs: The Reli-
easily become a vehicle for a modern religious gious Dimension”, Cross Currents 27:3 (1977), 26I-
278 ¢@ J.G. Platvoet, Comparing Religions: A Limi-
mythology. In this manner, Extraterrestrials are
tative Approach. An Analysis of Akan, Para-Creole,
transformed into the angels of a technological and and IFO-Sananda Rites and Prayers, The Hague, Paris,
scientific era. Due to aspirations found in some New York: Mouton, 1982, 48-55, 157-174 @ Jennifer
occultist trends since the roth century and to a pre- E. Porter, “Spiritualists, Aliens and UFOs: Extraterres-
existing interest for extraterrestrial life, it is there- trials as Spirit Guides”, Journal of Contemporary Reli-
fore not surprising that modern esotericism has gion 11:3 (1996), 337-353 # Jean-Bruno Renard, Les
sometimes become associated with an emergent Extraterrestres: Une nouvelle croyance religieuse?,
Paris: Editions du Cerf, 1988 # Wiktor Stoczkowski,
UFO mythology.
Des Hommes, des Dieux et des Extraterrestres: Eth-
nologie d’une croyance moderne, Paris: Flammarion,
Camille Flammarion, La Pluralité des Mondes habités, 1999 @ Mikael Rothstein, I culti dei dischi volanti,
Paris: Didier, 1862 Camille Flammarion, Les Terres Turin: Editrice Elle Di Ci, 2000 # Roy Wallis, “The
du Ciel, Paris: Didier, 1877 # Desmond Leslie & Aetherius Society: A Case Study in the Formation of a
George Adamski, Flying Saucers Have Landed, New Mystagogic Congregation”, in: Sectarianism: Analyses
York: British Book Centre, 1953 # Emanuel Sweden- of Religious and Non-Religious Sects, London: Peter
borg, De Telluribus in Mundo nostro Solari (Earths in Owen, 1975, 17-34 # Daniel Wojcik, The End of the
the Universe) @ Tuella, Ashtar: A Tribute, Salt Lake World as We Know It: Faith, Fatalism, and Apocalypse
City: Guardian Action International, 1987 # Claude in America, New York/London: New York University
Vorilhon, Le Livre qui dit la Vérité: J’ai rencontré un Press, 1997, ch. 8 @ Lou Zinsstag & Timothy Good,
extra-terrestre, Clermont-Ferrand: Edition du Mes- George Adamski: The Untold Story, Beckenham: Ceti
sage, 1974. Publications, 1983.
Lit.: Ernst Benz, Kosmische Bruderschaft: Die Plurali-
JEAN-FRANCOIS MAYER
tat der Welten, Freiburg im Breisgau: Aurum Verlag,
1978 @ Ernst Benz, “Swedenborgs Lehre von der Plu-
ralitat der Welten”, Vision und Offenbarung, Zirich: Uspenskii, Piotr Dem’ianovich >
Swedenborg Verlag, 1979, 39-61 Jerome Clark, Ouspensky, Piotr Dem’ianovich
“The Odyssey of Sister Thedra”, Syzygy: Journal of
Alternative Religion and Culture 6:2 (1997), 203-219
@ Jerome Clark, The UFO Book: Encyclopedia of the Valentinus and Valentinians
Extraterrestrial, Detroit: Visible Ink Press, 1998 @
Brenda Denzler, The Lure of the Edge: Scientific Pas-
1. SOURCES AND THEIR PROBLEMS
sions, Religious Beliefs, and the Pursuit of UFOs,
2. VALENTINUS 3. TWO MYTHOLOGICAL Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of Califor-
nia Press, 2001 @ Robert S. Ellwood, “UFO Religious SYSTEMS 4. ANTHROPOLOGY 5. THE
Movements”, in: Timothy Miller (ed.), America’s BRIDAL CHAMBER 6. COSMOLOGY
Alternative Religions, Albany: SUNY Press, 1995, 7. CHRISTOLOGY 8. THE TRIPARTITE
393-399 idem, “New Religions and the Reinvention TRACTATE 9. PTOLEMAEUS 10. HERACLEON
of Polytheism: Alienation, Postmodernism and UFOs”,
tt. THEODOTUS 12. THE GOSPEL OF TRUTH
in: Bertrand Ouellet & Richard Bergeron (eds.), Croy-
ances et Sociétés, Montréal: Fides, 1998, 485-494 @
Leon Festinger et al., When Prophecy Fails, Min- 1. SOURCES AND THEIR PROBLEMS
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1956 @ Marc The Valentinian school represents the most
Hallet, Desert Center: George Adamski, Régusse: important heretical Christian current of the 2nd

--- Page 569 ---
I145 VALENTINUS AND VALENTINIANS
and 3rd centuries AD, whose traces are still evident ered to be particularly heretical. Irenaeus (Adver-
as late as the 7th and 8th centuries. The name sus Haereses [AH], 1 praef.) already writes: “They
“Valentinians” is first found in Justin (Dialogus speak as we do, but their meaning is all to the con-
cum Tryphone, 35, 6) and Hegesippus (in Euse- trary’. Such a text, however, cannot then serve as
bius, Historia Ecclesiastica, 1V, 22, 5), and also evidence for a specific stage of development within
in the form ‘those who stem from Valentinus’ Valentinianism. The contents of the “esoteric”
(frequent in Origen), while Irenaeus, > Clement writings certainly included the cosmogonic myth,
of Alexandria, Hippolytus, and others speak of in which the entire theology and philosophy of the
“Valentinus’s school”. The group was distributed Valentinians is contained. This myth is preserved
throughout the Mediterranean area (especially in in many different and in some respects contra-
Rome, North Africa, and Asia Minor), and formed dictory variants, and was surely revealed only to
its own social and cultic-ritual community apart certain well-prepared hearers. The differences be-
from the nascent church of the Catholic majority. tween these versions show that the myth was not
This division took place through a long process a dogmatic, fixed system for the Valentinians, but
(Interpretation of Knowledge, NHC XI, 1, reflects a highly versatile means of setting forth their
on this), and despite ample source-material it is teachings about God, creation, and redemption
very difficult to form a picture of the historical (its prototype was surely the Platonic myth in the
development of the Valentinians. The sources fall Timaeus). Each author constructs his own inter-
into two groups. The first consists of the Church pretation of certain basic ideas and structures of
Fathers’ arguments against the Valentinian heresy, thought common to the Valentinians, and neither
in texts marked by a polemic that somewhat dis- can it be excluded that various versions of the myth
torts the subject (Hippolytus, Refutatio, VI, 42, 1 may be attributable to one and the same author,
reports that a Valentinian group has taken issue distinguished further by their degrees of abstrac-
with Irenaeus’s distorted representation of them). tion. The myth provides the background for the
These authors are not primarily interested in his- Valentinian exegesis, applied especially to Paul
torical truth, or else are inadequately informed on and John, but also to the synoptic gospels, and
the matter. They often do not use original sources, already employed a highly sophisticated allegori-
and repeat secondhand reports which they treat in cal method. Here the Valentinians seem to have
a careless fashion. The second source is preserved been in advance of the common Christian exegetes:
through the discovery of the papyrus collection at Valentinus’s famous pupil Heracleon undertook
Nag Hammadi, containing many original texts in the first coherent commentary on a New Testament
the Coptic language that were probably translated text.
from the Greek and written down in the 4th cen- The reconstruction of the history of the Valen-
tury A.D. These texts are handed down without tinians is further hindered by the fact that only a
information on their authorship or the time and few original fragments remain from their founder,
place of their origin, so that controversy often Valentinus, whose spirit and rhetorical gift were
exists over whether a text is authentically Valentin- acknowledged even by his opponents (Tertullian,
ian, or whether it just shows Valentinian influences. Adv. Val. 4). Attempts to ascribe further texts to
The name of Valentinus himself only appears once, him remain controversial. This slim basis has even
in a polemical context (Testimonium of Truth, led to Valentinus been seen as a Platonicaily-
NHC IX, 3, 56, rff.). None of these sources reveal inclined Vermittlungstheologe (intermediary the-
much about the social realities of the Valentinians. ologian) who stayed within the framework of the
One four-line epigram found in the Via Latina in majority church; thereafter his pupils and their
Rome is offered as evidence (Guarducci 1983), but pupils supposedly invented the heretical myth of
is debatable because of its fragmentary nature. the “fall” of Sophia and the origin of the world
The very existence of the Valentinian writings through an inadequate world-creator. Such a
creates a further problem. One may assume that view must ignore certain vital elements in the
they gave out their teachings at different levels, fragments, and cannot well explain why the differ-
intended for different hearers (on the practice of ent pupils should have propounded such similar
keeping certain doctrines secret, see Tertullian, ideas independently of their master. It is said of
Adversus Valentinianos, 1). We can differentiate the pupils that they split into an Italian school -
roughly here between “exoteric” and “esoteric” Ptolemaeus, Heracleon, Secundus — and an Eastern
teachings, whereby an exoteric writing would be one — Axionicus in Antioch, Bardesanes, Theo-
closer to the positions of the majority church, dotus (thus Hippolytus, Refutatio,VI, 35, 7; it is
and merely leave unstated the doctrines consid- astonishing that he ascribes Bardesanes to the

--- Page 570 ---
VALENTINUS AND VALENTINIANS 1146
Valentinian school). Following Tertullian’s state- belong within a Valentinian milieu. In almost all of
ment that only Axionicus preserved Valentinus’s the five texts included there, the authorship of
teachings intact (Adv. Val., 4, 3), Valentinus would Valentinus or one of his better-known pupils has
have to be included on the Eastern side. But been considered, without any consensus being
even this report of a split is unhelpful, since so reached. The most important texts, which are
few characteristics of these schools can be recon- related to each other in many respects, are the
structed, and an unambiguous attribution of the Gospel of Truth (NHC I, 3, Frg. in XII, 2) and the
surviving texts to one school or the other seems Tripartite Tractate (NHC, I, 5), to which may be
impossible (e.g. Markos is attributed to both). As added the short but, in terms of style and content,
in the cases of Secundus and Axionicus, we know no less demanding Treatise on the Resurrection
little more of the other Valentinians than their (NHC I, 4). The majority of scholars accept the
names: Alexander (Tertullian, De carne Christi, Valentinian origin of these three texts. Considering
15f.: Christ without earthly and human body), their extraordinary quality, it is evidently problem-
Theotimus (Tertullian, Adv. Val., 4, 3 calls him the atic that scholarship favors an attribution of them
exegete of the “pictures” of the Law), Florinus (Ire- to an unknown Valentinian; even if we knew no
naeus wrote letters to him and asked Victor to take more, it would be improbable that their author was
legal action against him; see Eusebius, Historia an “Anonymous”. The Prayer of the Apostle Paul
Ecclesiastica, V, 20, 4-8), Candidus (with whom (NHC I, 1) and the Apocryphon of James (NHC
Origen disputed circa 230 A.D. in Athens; see I, 2) are possibly of Valentinian origin. The sec-
Rufinus, De adulteratione librorum Originis, 7; ond codex contains the uncontestably Valentinian
Jerome, Adversus Rufinum, 2, 18f.). Gospel of Philip (NHC II, 3): an anthology of ex-
Consequently, all that today’s interpreter can do tracts of very different genres (aphorism, parallel,
is to place the various texts and reports side by side, paranesis, polemic, exegesis, treatise), including
without being able to sort them into a definite among other things valuable information on the
historical context or a demonstrable sequence. sacraments of the Valentinians. Lastly there are
Among the few fragments of Valentinus, there is two texts in the eleventh codex, unfortunately only
above all Irenaeus’s exposition of the Valentinian fragmentarily preserved, for which a Valentinian
teachings (AH, I, 1-20, circa 180 A.D.) and a par- origin is generally accepted: the Interpretation of
allel exposition in Clement (Excerpta ex Theodoto, Knowledge (NHC XI, 1) and A Valentinian Expo-
43-65, circa 200 A.D.), and a related myth trans- sition (NHC IX, 2), with five supplements on the
mitted by Hippolytus (Refutatio, VI, 29-36, circa Anointing, Baptism (A and B) and Eucharist (A
220 A.D.); possibly one should also include the and B). The influence of Valentinian teachings is
“Naassene tract” transmitted by Hippolytus, V, 6- detectable in The Exegesis on the Soul (NHC IIL, 6),
1o. The Church Father Epiphanius preserves an The first and second Apocalypse of James (NHC V,
original “Letter to Flora” by Ptolemaeus (Pana- 3 and 4), Authoritative Teaching (NHC VI, 3), and
rion, 33, 3-7), and a “Valentinian doctrinal letter” The Letter of Peter to Philip (NHC VIII, 2). A spe-
(Panarion, 31, 5, 2-6, 10) which with its compli- cial problem is posed by the Apocryphon ofJohn
cated speculations on Aeons probably represents (NHC II, 1, Il, 1, IV, 1 and BG 8502,2). This text,
a later development of Valentinianism. Origen’s preserved in both a short and a long version, has
Commentary (225-250 A.D.) preserves extracts clear parallels to the texts excerpted by Irenaeus in
of Heracleon’s exegesis of John’s Gospel, and AH, I, 29-30. This Church Father claims that the
there are also Valentinian interpretations in De adherents of this teaching, whom he calls “Gnos-
principiis and his Commentary on Romans. Last of tics”, stem from + Simon Magus and are in turn
this group, Clement of Alexandria collected the spiritual forerunners of Valentinus (AH, 1, 11,
excerpts attributed to Theodotus. In contrast, Ter- 1). In accordance with this theory, many scholars
tullian’s Adversus Valentinianos (circa 210 A.D.) see in the Apocryphon of John a non-Christian,
depends for the most part on secondary sources; Sethian [-> Sethians] (or Ophite [> Ophites]) myth,
and the same applies to the anti-heretical writings which Valentinus first christianized. The alterna-
of Pseudo-Tertullian, Epiphanius, Filastrius of tive view, which is preferred here, sees in Irenaeus’s
Brescia, and Theodoret. It is very doubtful that theory the polemical attempt to discredit the Valen-
Justin’s lost Syntagma can be reconstructed from tinians by tracing their origins to > Simon Magus,
these late sources. Finally, Valentinian influence is the apostle’s opponent. Irenaeus invents the sect
visible in the Acts of John (94-102, 109). of “Gnostics” as link between Simon and Valenti-
Among the Nag Hammadi discoveries, the texts nus, and attributes to them a mythical scheme
of the Jung-Codex (NHC I) are the ones that most that does in fact show clear influences of Valentin-

--- Page 571 ---
1147 VALENTINUS AND VALENTINIANS
ian teachings (Epiphanius, Panarion, 27, 1, 2 The realization that the order of the cosmos and the
makes the Valentinians depend on the “Gnostics”, ensoulment of man have their origin in this child is
as does Theodoret, Haereticarum fabularum com- described as the eschatological event of the “har-
pendium, 1, 13). In this view, the Apocryphon of vest” that is anticipated in this life (following John
Jobn first appeared around the middle of the 2nd 4, 35-38). The divine act that caused the appear-
century in a Valentinian milieu. ance of the world and of man attains its goal in
human knowledge: that which God sowed at the
2. VALENTINUS Creation, man harvests through this knowledge. At
Little is known of Valentinus’s life. ‘He came to the same time, this knowledge is the dissolution of
Rome under Hyginus (136-140 A.D.), passed the the cosmos, that is, of its transitory parts (Clement,
best of his age under Pius (140-155 A.D.), and Strom., IV, 89, 3); according to the Treatise on the
remained until Anicet (155-166 A.D.)’ (Irenaeus, Resurrection (NHCI, 4), in this knowledge the res-
AH, Ill, 4, 3). The text does not state that he taught urrection of the dead already takes place (cf. 2 Tim.
in Rome unopposed; on the contrary, Tertullian 2, 18). The cosmos of Valentinus is indeed ruled
reports that > Marcion and Valentinus ‘were through and through by God, but as a material cre-
thrown out by turns’ (De praescriptione haeretico- ation it is subject to death. Man can only escape
rum, 30, 2). He was probably born in Egypt this if, thanks to his knowledge, he turns away
around the turn of the century, and certainly stud- from the transitory and returns to the divine. Jesus
ied Platonic philosophy (possibly in Alexandria; lived this in exemplary form: his encratia went so
thus Epiphanius, Panarion, 31, 2, 3). His teacher far that although he ate and drank, he did not
was supposedly Paul’s pupil Theodas (Clement digest (from a letter to Agathopus in Clement,
of Alexandria, Stromateis, VII, 106, 4; a certain Strom., Ill, 59, 3). This failed attempt to picture the
Theuda is named in NHC V, 4, 44, 18). Although divinity and humanity of the Redeemer in concrete
he must have taught in Rome for a considerable terms points to the later problems that would arise
time, he seems to have been unknown to Justin, from the further encounter of Greek thought with
who stayed in Rome at about the same time; nor the Christian kerygma.
does Justin’s pupil Tatian mention him. It is difficult Additional traces of Valentinus’s cosmology
to judge the veracity of the report that Valentinus and anthropology are visible in two fragments
wanted to become a bishop, but was refused (Clement, Strom., Il, 36, 2-4 and IV, 89, 6-90, r).
(Tertullian, Adv. Val., 4, 1f.). Valentinus is also said Valentinus takes from the concepts of middle Pla-
to have lived in Cyprus, and there first fallen tonism the distinction between the highest God and
away from the “true faith” (Epiphanius, Panarion, lower creator-figures. To God is connected the
31, 7, 2). Beside the few surviving extracts from transcendent level of being of the Ideas, which
sermons and letters, Pseudo-Anthimus (= Marcellus Valentinus, like his philosophical colleagues, seems
of Ancyra?) testifies to a work entitled On the to have understood as God’s thoughts, motions
Three Natures (De sancta ecclesia, 9). and emotions (Tertullian, Adv. Val., 4, 2). As lower
Valentinus is said to have written Christian actors, a host of angels (the plural coming from
psalms (Tertullian, De carne Christi, 17, 1; Origen, Genesis 1, 26) took part in the origin of mankind,
Enarrationes in Jobum, 21, 12), and among the and the Demiurge in that of the cosmos. The effects
fragments there is also a short hymn in meiuric of the divine world of Ideas are personified in the
dactylic meter (Hippolytus, Refutatio, VI, 37, 7). Logos (also called Aion); in the creation of man, the
This presents the divine trinity of Father (called motive force that emerges from the Idea of man is
Bythos), Mother (presumably Sophia), and Child. made manifest in the “Anthropos” (primeval man;
This new-born child is identified with the divine the Anthropos being the aspect of the Logos that is
world of Ideas, the Logos. Another fragment concerned with the creation of man). Logos and
specifies the visionary recognition of the identity Anthropos bestow the divine element, platonically
of the new-born child and Logos as the starting- speaking: the form that stamps the matter and
point of the heretical myth (Hippolytus, Refutatio, makes it the image of the Ideas; this form also
VI, 42, 2): Valentinus sees the connection of the gives its name to the individual thing. The effects
philosophical logos-conceptions with the biblical proceeding from matter, however, are symbolized
account of the child in the manger. Valentinus’s in mythological language by the angels and the
importance can be seen in the fact that he made Demiurge. The world and man can only arise
what was probably the first comprehensive attempt through the collaboration of the divine and demi-
to interpret the New Testament report against the urgic powers; but the lower powers are ina state of
background of contemporary Greek philosophy. ignorance in relation to the divine. This is why the

--- Page 572 ---
VALENTINUS AND VALENTINIANS 1148
angels were alarmed when newly-created man, well thought-out structure of Valentinus’s teach-
bearing the divine within him, gave evidence of ings, which are evident in the fragments, it is
divine knowledge, and why the cosmos remains so unlikely that it was the pupils who first sought to
inferior a copy of its original model. Evil arose answer this question with the help of a myth. We
because the angels refused knowledge and sepa- have to assume that Valentinus himself created a
rated man from God. The emotions and the evil cosmogonic myth that explained the existence of
deeds that result from them are, according to deficient creative powers; but what form it took
Valentinus, the consequence of ignorance of the can no longer be reconstructed. An important wit-
divine. These emotions are frequently described in ness to it is Irenaeus’s account Against Heresies
colorful language as demons in the hearts of men, (AH, I, 1-9). Scholars have attributed this myth to
which only fail when man is enlightened by God the Valentinian pupil Ptolemaeus on the basis of a
(Clement, Strom., II, 114, 3-6). In Valentinus’s brief remark at the end of the eighth chapter, which
conception of the creative powers as being ignorant however is only found in the Latin translation.
of the divine, he differs both from the majority of But it appears from Irenaeus’s Foreword that this
his Christian fellow-believers and from his philo- Church Father excerpted writings (Hypomnemata)
sophical colleagues. Only by ignoring his negative by persons who called themselves ‘pupils of
view of the creative powers can one imagine that he Valentinus’. Since Irenaeus refers to several differ-
had not abandoned the framework of the majori- ent versions of the myth (the two chief ones are
tarian theology of the 2nd century. This ignorance known as Systems A and B; Irenaeus treats further
of the lower creators marks the world, and espe- versions in AH, I, 11-21), it can no longer be
cially man. Only through the revelation of God in clarified in what relation the outlines by the
his Son can man be freed from the state of igno- “pupils” stand to Valentinus himself. A parallel
rance which makes him subject to the demons. For to one section of this myth is offered by part of
man is not capable by himself of overcoming the the excerpts attributed to Theodotus (Clement,
material world and becoming ‘Lord over the cre- Excerpta ex Theodoto, 43-65); another mytholog-
ation and all things temporal’ (Clement, Strom., IV, ical sketch, similar in many points but unfortu-
89, 3). Therefore Valentinus criticizes a theology nately very damaged, is offered by the Valentinian
that promises man that he will overcome death Exposition (NHC XI, 2).
through suffering bodily martyrdom. He, however,
who has recognized God through his revelation 3. Two MYTHOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
also recognizes the divine in himself, which Valenti- The myth in Version A begins with the descrip-
nus calls ‘the law written in the heart’ (from a ser- tion of the Pleroma, the “fullness” of the divine,
mon On Friends, Clement, Strom., IV, 52, 4). Man transcendent world: out of a “Forefather” (Pro-
now understands himself as a ‘child of eternal life’ pator) who is also called “Depth” (Bythos) there
(Clement, Strom., IV, 89, 1). The self-manifestation arise thirty Aeons (“Eternities”) who are grouped
of God through his Son, who gives man the saving into a first Eight (Ogdoas), a Ten, and a Twelve
knowledge, thus stands at the center of Valentinus’s (Pythagorean number speculation [~ Number
theology. But this Son is the same being who at the Symbolism] being in the background). All the
creation, as Logos or “Anthropos”, creates the pre- Aeons are organized by pairs in syzygies: at the top
requisites for this knowledge: he gives man a divine are “Forefather” and “Silence” (Sige), who is also
element, the ‘seed of the higher being’, which first called “Thought” (Ennoia). Unlike the God of the
put man in the position of gaining knowledge Old Testament, who creates through the word
(Clement, Strom., II, 36, 2). Valentinus thereby (Genesis 1), the Valentinian God does so through
attempts to link anthropology with soteriology, silence. Next there arise “Reason” (Nous or
with the help of Platonic traditions. Since man, in “Monogenes”) and “Truth,” “Word” (Logos) and
this view, is simultaneously subject to matter and “Life” (Zoe), “Man” and “Church”, who together
its powers, he is in danger of falling victim to igno- comprise the Eight. Irenaeus ascribes this sequence
rance and the emotions that result from it. From of Aeons expressly to Valentinus (AH, I, 11, 1), and
the fragments the question arises of how the igno- they also underlie the Valentinian Exposition
rant, lower creative powers, beside God and the (NHC XI, 2, where a further 100 and 360 Aeons
world of Ideas connected to him, could ever have proceed from the 30; cf. Secundus in Irenaeus, AH,
come into existence at all (Ptolemaeus poses this I, r1, 2). A comprehensive exegesis of the Prologue
question explicitly at the end of his Letter to Flora). to John’s Gospel, handed down by Irenaeus, sug-
The Valentinian myth tries to offer an answer to gests that the first eight Aeons were named in rela-
this question. In view of the inner coherence and tion to this text (AH, I, 8, 5; cf. Clement, Excerpta,

--- Page 573 ---
1149 VALENTINUS AND VALENTINIANS
6f.). The remaining 22 Aeons present philosophical (tolma) for her Father. Her search takes a form that
concepts (“Mixture”, “Insight,” “Desire”, etc.) was not willed by God, for together with the igno-
and models of Christian virtues (“Faith”, “Hope”, rance provoked by the Father, there was the danger
“Love”, etc.), and the final Aeon is “Wisdom” of a false kind of seeking. Sophia represents the
(Sophia). The 30 Aeons correspond to the 30 years natural-scientific form of the search for God, which
of Jesus’ life, and since each one reveals the divine tries to grasp him objectively without realizing that
Pleroma, his life presents an image of transcendent the Father is ungraspable. In the figure of Sophia,
eternity (cf. Plato, Timaeus, 37f.). the myth distances itself from the attempts to reach
Nous alone knows the Forefather. This fact wisdom by the philosophical schools, who in
becomes the cause of all later events, because the Valentinus’s view ignored the transcendent divinity
Forefather prevents the Nous from sharing its of the Father. In the myth, Sophia is stopped by a
knowledge with all the other Aeons. The reason barrier (Horos) which surrounds the Father and is
given for this is that they should first arrive at a identified with the cross, and is thereby convinced
thought of, and a desire for knowledge, which that the Father is ungraspable. Her intention
leads to seeking it. Basic to this is the Platonic prin- (Enthymesis) and her passion (Pathos) are ban-
ciple that the act of knowledge must arise from a ished from the Pleroma. The banished Enthymesis
consciousness of previous ignorance, and from becomes, as outer Sophia or “Mother”, the deci-
longing to overcome it (the concept of “longing” sive actor in all subsequent events. The action of
and “seeking” is found, e.g. in Plato, Meno, 8 4c). the Horos is understood as a crucifixion; the Chris-
One who already believes that he knows will not tian redemption event already takes place arche-
seek, and thus never arrive at knowledge. This epis- typically in the Pleroma: it is an act of knowledge
temological approach is used in the myth in ques- and a separation from all the non-divine (on
tion to describe the occurrences in the Pleroma. Horos, cf. Valentinian Exposition, NHC XI, 2, 26,
The Aeons, too, before they know the Father, 32ff., where four powers are attributed to it: ‘a sep-
experience a phase of ignorance, or rather of non- arating one, a consolidating one, a formative one
actualized knowledge, which they must recognize and a substance-providing one’). Similarly all the
as such, because only thus will the longing arise to other Aeons are led to knowledge by Christ and the
seek the unknown. The divine goes through a kind Holy Spirit, who are now emanated. The events in
of crisis: in order for knowledge to take place as the Pleroma thus comprise a self-contained salva-
act, it must first experience the absence of knowl- tion story: the arisal of the divine, its existence in
edge. This absence explains the appearance of the ignorance, and the knowledge through revelation
world, for the lack of knowledge leads to emotions, and final trial.
which in their further development form the mate- The history of the “misfortune” (the expression
rial substratum of the world. The myth does not try “fall” is problematic) of a divine being is charac-
to give any account of the world’s arisai in terms of teristic of the Valentinian myth, and this event is
natural philosophy (how could ignorance turn into recounted in ever new ways. In another version of
matter?), but describes the cosmos as it is presented the myth (B), presented in the so-called “gnostic”
to man: it is characterized by a lack of knowledge collection used by Hippolytus (Refutatio, VI, 29ff.)
and is therefore a strange and threatening place; but already known to Irenaeus (AH, I, 2, 3-6),
within it and without it, man can find no access Sophia’s fate is described as follows. The divine
to God. Consequently the cosmos dissolves again Father exists alone as “Monas” without a female
when knowledge of the divine is achieved and partner (the Valentinians, according to Hippolytus,
all ignorance is overcome. The remarkable thing were divided over the question of whether the high-
about this solution of the question of why there est God should or should not be thought of with a
is evil in the world (theodicy) lies in the fact that female element beside him; see Refutatio, VI, 29, 3;
ignorance has its origin on the divine plane of being cf. Valentinian Exposition, NHC XI, 2, 22, 23-27,
of the Aeons, and is expressly willed by the highest which even attempts to combine both approaches).
God. Thus the material cosmos that arises from The Father, who is alone in himself, first emanates
this is an unavoidable station on the way of the the “Dyas”, the first duality of a pair of Aeons
divine to itself, ie. to the actualized knowledge of (“Nous” and “Truth”), out of whom come a fur-
its highest cause. ther 13 pairs of Aeons (the ground of creation here
In the myth, the crisis that the Aeons experi- being named Love, which seeks an object); Sophia,
ence is precipitated by the Aeon Sophia. She sepa- the 28th Aeon, wants to give birth like the Father
rates herself from her companion Theletos (the without her companion “Will”, but brings forth only
“Willed”) and seeks in passionate excitement a formless creation, a miscarriage; cf. Valentinian

--- Page 574 ---
VALENTINUS AND VALENTINIANS I1g5o
Exposition, NHC XI, 2: ‘That she should suffer, a fleshly covering, is counted as a fourth element).
then, was not the will of the Father, for she dwells In his hylic aspect, his ignorance and fallen state are
in herself alone without her consort’. This event is evident in the emotions. His psychic part stems
accompanied by states of ignorance, sorrow, fear, from Achamoth’s beseeching of the divine. For the
and dismay; the Aeons turn pleadingly to the human soul, this means that it has a decisive part in
Father. Thereupon two further Aeons, Christ and the redemptive act of knowledge; for man must
Holy Spirit, are emanated, who complete the num- turn to his redeemer in order to find knowledge
ber 30; they remove the miscarriage from Sophia there. The myth indicates that the soul or psychic
and form it into the outer Sophia, who is in no way man possesses free will (autexousios). Thus it is in
less wise than the Aeons in the Pleroma. A Platonic no way predetermined which man will attain sav-
doctrine also underlies this theme, concerning the ing knowledge; the soul chooses freely whether to
relation of substance (imagined as female) and turn to Christ, or not to do so. Only when this
form (imagined as male). Sophia’s attempt to give conversion is made can the divine be formed.
birth without spiritual form fails; her creation Beside this aspect of free will, there is, however,
needs additional formation by the Redeemer; in the a doctrine of human classes, which became a
same way, everything earthly and cosmic is re- chief object of criticism on the part of the Church
garded as formless, and must be newly formed by Fathers. According to this, there are three differ-
the knowledge that Christ brings. ent natures among mankind, represented by
The story of salvation in the uppermost realm Cain (“hylic”), Abel (“psychic”), and Seth (“pneu-
repeats itself at a middle level in the fate of the matic”). Clement especially accused Valentinus
outer Sophia, who is called Achamoth: in System A (calling him ‘the naturally redeemed’) and his stu-
she finds herself outside the Pleroma and is formed dents of preaching predetermined salvation, with-
as to her existence, but not as to knowledge. She out appreciating the crucial function of the soul.
too must realize her condition of exile from the The myth teaches that men are not all created
Pleroma and feel longing for the divine. But she equal: only a few possess the divine pneuma; they
also suffers emotions in her ignorance; eventually are called “pneumatics” and the “chosen”. The
she turns upward beseechingly. Thereupon a sec- reasons or criteria by which one soul receives a
ond Christ (the “Soter”) comes down and, as re- pneuma and another not are seldom stated. This
vealer and redeemer, brings her the form of pneuma-doctrine represents the attempt to inter-
knowledge and the detachment of her emotions. pret the Pauline doctrine of grace with the help of a
Out of the latter arises the matter (Hyle) of the Platonic doctrine of natures. Man can reach salva-
world, and out of her beseeching, the psychic. tion through the pneuma; however, it is not within
Moreover, the outer Sophia brings forth the “pneu- his power to possess it — it is not at his disposal but
matic” seeds, which are sowed in (certain) men as is a gift. Yet the possession of the pneuma does not
the divine element. She gives birth to the pneumatic guarantee salvation; it must be formed with the
sparks at the sight of the angels who accompany help of the freely-acting soul, i.e. it must attain the
her redeemer. knowledge of its divine origin; cf. Apocryphon of
The salvation history of the Aeons and Acha- James, NHC I, 2, 5, 3-6: ‘He will reckon you to
moth repeats itself at a third level in mankind. have become beloved through his providence by
The similarity of events is reflected in the vertical your own choice”. If this does not occur, the divine
line of descent (upper Sophia — lower Sophia — pneuma, which cannot die, must be sowed in
pneumatic seeds). The human pneuma must also be another soul. Next to the “pneumatics” are the
formed, i.e. must attain to knowledge. This forma- “psychics”, who possess no pneuma but can still
tion, which is achieved by the earthly Christ, is the turn to the Redeemer. They are the “called”; they
actual goal of the entire mythical event. As with the do not attain pneumatic knowledge, but remain
Aeons in the Pleroma and with the lower Sophia, at the stage of faith and must do good works
the man who possesses a pneumatic core finds him- (see, however, e.g. the Treatise on the Resurrection,
self in a state of ignorance; he must become aware NHC I, 4, where faith is the mark of the pneumat-
of this lack and apply himself to the search for the ics). These “psychics” refer to the Christians of the
divine. majority church who reject the Valentinian teach-
ing, but can still attain a limited salvation. The
4. ANTHROPOLOGY third class of men is the “hylics” or the “choics”
This condition of man is clear from his three (the “earthly men”), in whom the soul (the psychic
parts, or rather modes of existence: he has a pneu- man) does not even manage to turn to Christ, but is
matic seed, but also carries within him a hylic totally given over to the lower parts of the soul or
(material) man and a psychic man (the visible body, to material interests. This doctrine of human

--- Page 575 ---
II5t
VALENTINUS AND VALENTINIANS
classes fulfils two distinct requirements: it attempts Redeemer who descends to her from the Pleroma,
on the one hand to explain the difficult relationship so the Valentinians also use a sexual metaphor for
between grace and freedom, and on the other, to the redemption process of the human pneuma. Per-
define the relationship of the Valentinian Chris- haps this derives from Aristophanes’ speech in
tians to those of the Church and the rest of their Plato’s Symposium, for the pneuma-sparks are
environment. seen as female, and as uniting with their male
The foundations of Valentinian ethics follow companions, the angels (cf. Clement, Excerpta,
from the distinction between pneumatics and psy- 21). The pair of Sophia and Redeemer (Soter)
chics. The pneumatic, through his knowledge, has thereby represents the totality of human pneuma-
left the earthly world behind; it has a neutral value sparks and angels; in the myth, this is shown
(adiaphoron) for him. The psychic, in contrast, through genetic relationships: the angels are broth-
must prove his faith repeatedly through good ers of the Redeemer, the pneuma-sparks creations
works; the precepts of the law apply to him. The of Sophia. The saving knowledge is presented in
Church Fathers criticized this scheme and accused the image of the bridal chamber in which the two
the Valentinians of ethical libertinism, expressed separated parts find themselves together again. It is
especially in sexual debauchery. The truth of these debatable whether besides baptism (and anointing)
accusations is difficult to ascertain: the original there was an independent rite of the bridal cham-
sources from Nag Hammadi are marked through- ber (possibly as sacrament for the dying), in which
out by an ethical rigor and an ascetic attitude, as the union was ritually symbolized. At any rate, one
for instance Interpretation of Knowledge, NHC reads in the Gospel of Philip (NHC II, 3, 67, 27-30):
XI, 1, 21, 31f.: ‘But if we surmount every sin, we ‘The Lord did everything in a mystery, a baptism
shall receive the crown of victory’. Nevertheless, and a chrism and a eucharist and a redemption and
some Valentinians may have demonstrated their a bridal chamber’, and Irenaeus states of a Valen-
superiority to the world through activities that tinian group (AH, I, 21, 3): ‘For some of them
seemed offensive to their Christian environment frame a bridal chamber, and solemnize an initia-
(e.g. eating sacrificial meat, taking part in gladiato- tion, with certain invocations upon those who
rial combats). It is also possible that in situations of are being perfected, and they say that what they do
persecution they denied their Christianity, seeing is a spiritual marriage, after the similitude of the
this confession before the earthiy rulers as irrele- marriages on high’. Possibly this is a matter simply
vant to their salvation. Thus Heracleon in his com- of a “pneumatic” interpretation of baptism, ex-
mentary on Luke 12, 8-11 reckons it better to pressed in specific formulae and prayers; cf. Gospel
confess through faith and conduct than by mouth; of Philip, NHC Il, 3, 69, 25-27: ‘Baptism includes
the latter is required ‘when it is necessary and good the resurrection and the redemption; the re-
sense demands it’ (Clement, Strom. IV, 71, 4). demption takes place in the bridal chamber”. That
In System B, an identical soteriology is developed which is forgiveness of sins for the “Church Chris-
with a different anthropological! model. Every man tians” is for the “gnostic” Christians “redemption”
consists of body and soul, but before the revela- (lytrosis), through which the pneuma can return to
tion, every soul was filled with demons: in pre- its heavenly home (cf. Tractatus Tripartitus, NHC
Christian times, all men were hylics. Christ comes I, 5, 128, 33-36: ‘Baptism is also called “bridal
into the world to bring the emotions of the soul chamber” because of the agreement and the indi-
into order, i.e., he comes to drive out the demons. visible state of those who know they have known
This happens when the human soul uses the power him’). Others, according to Irenaeus, rejected bap-
that it possesses from the pleas and beseeching tism and preferred only an anointing (cf. Gospel of
of the outer Sophia — and that is its free decision — Truth, NHC I, 3, 36, 17ff.); a few dispensed with
and turns to Christ. Such a man becomes a psychic. sacraments altogether and saw “redemption” in
But again, it depends on divine grace whether the knowledge alone.
“Logos” is sown through the encounter with
Christ, so that a man attains perfect knowledge and 6. COSMOLOGY
becomes a “gnostic” (“one who knows”). The To the anthropological event that sets Achamoth
classes of mankind arise in System B through the in motion, there corresponds the cosmological
encounter with Christ; but here, too, the doctrine event. Achamoth herself represents in the cosmos
concerns the problem of grace and free will. the eighth and outermost sphere of the fixed stars
(“Ogdoas”), beyond the seven planets known in
5. THE BRIDAL CHAMBER Antiquity. In philosophical terms, she represents
As the formation of knowledge in the case of the noetic World-Soul which surrounds the cosmos
Achamoth is presented as unification with the and ensures its ever-constant motion. Above her is

--- Page 576 ---
VALENTINUS AND VALENTINIANS 1152
the transcendent world of Ideas, bound to no the Pleroma, and finally in man, becomes possible
space, which is represented in the myth by the through the revelation; there are consequently
thirty Aeons. In her function as noetic World-Soul, three Christ-figures who act on their respective
Achamoth is also that which forms everything levels of being. This threefold nature prompted
below. From the psychic substance that arose out of much criticism and also much confusion among the
her appeal to the divine she brings forth the Demi- Church Fathers (and the Valentinians themselves?),
urge, who dwells in the Sevenfold (“Hebdomas”); so that it is often unclear which Christ is being dis-
beneath him are the other planetary rulers. The cussed. Apparently the Valentinians also argued
Demiurge, an image of God the Father (Clement, about whether the earthly Christ, who has assumed
Excerpta, 47, 2), is not hostile to the divine; rather, nothing material, possesses a psychic or only a
he is also destined to turn eventually toward the pneumatic body; and this supposedly brought
Redeemer. Until the revelation, however, he as well about the split into an Italian and an Eastern school
is a prisoner of ignorance and defined by emotions. (Hippolytus, Refutatio, VI, 35, 5-7). In Christ’s
In this condition he forms, as creator, everything martydom, only his psychic part is capable of suf-
psychic and material, whereby — without knowing fering; this suffering has the purpose of attaining
it — he is guided by the outer Sophia. The result is a the state of emotionlessness (“apathy”) (Clement,
principial distance vis-a-vis the world and all the Excerpta, 61, 3). Crucifixion and resurrection are
orderings in it: “The rich have become poor, and the the place at which Christ finally overcomes death,
kings have been overthrown! Everything is prone by deceiving the earthly powers which seek to kill
to change. The world is an illusion! — lest, indeed, him, and thereby robbing them of their power. This
I rail at things to excess!’ (Treatise on the Resur- salvation, however, does not apply to anything
rection, NHC I, 4, 48, 24-30). The Demiurge is bodily or material: that must perish. In order to
identified with the God of the Old Testament. His understand the threefold nature of the Christ
ignorance shows itself especially in the expression figure, one must refer to the Platonic model of
of Isaiah 45, 5/46, 9: ‘I am God and none beside archetype and copy, which is of great significance
me’. It is he, too, who made the hylic and psychic for the Valentinian myth: ‘For all things here, they
man in Paradise, the fourth heaven. The demotion say, are types (typoi) of the things there’ (Irenaeus,
of the Creator of the world and of man met with AH, I, 7, 2). The archetype is not to be understood
the most decided resistance from the Church Chris- in a historical sense, as if it existed in space and
tians. For the Valentinians, it was the consequence time at an earlier period. It is more a supra-tempo-
of their assessment of the visible world as the place ral model for earthly events, and stands outside his-
of ignorance and emotions. The transcendent torical development. In this sense, the redemptive
God of knowledge cannot have anything to do with event on the level of the Pleroma and the outer
this world; only the pneuma-sparks that are in it Sophia is only the archetype for the fate of the
have the possibility of surmounting it and return- human pneuma; and likewise the higher Christ
ing to the divine Pleroma. When all the pneuma- figure is the supra-temporal model for the earthly
sparks have reached perfection, the world perishes. Christ. The myth which proceeds in temporal
Sophia rises to the Pleroma and, together with the sequence is not to be taken literally in this respect.
Redeemer, becomes a syzygy. The duplication of What is historical is God’s revelation through the
Sophia lasts, therefore, only for the duration of the Son, which is the beginning of the revolution that
world, and is abolished at the end of time; as long will have reached its goal when everything divine in
as the world lasts, however, the juxtaposition of the the world has attained knowledge. This historical
transcendent Pleroma and the cosmic “Ogdoas” is event has archetypes outside space and time, which
constitutive. Like Sophia and the Redeemer, at the can elucidate the meaning of earthly events but are
end-time the pneuma-sparks and the angels will not themselves part of history.
find their bridal chamber in the Pleroma, having
left behind what is psychic and material. The Demi- 8. THE TRIPARTITE TRACTATE
urge and everything psychic that has turned to The discovery of manuscripts at Nag Hammadi
Christ will find its salvation outside the Pleroma in has given us access to an extremely important and
the highest sphere of heaven (“Ogdoas”) (cf. Hera- original text, which describes in a similar way how
cleon, Frg. 13, in Origen, Comm. on John, X, 33). the divine came out of itself, created the world and
Everything else will perish in a final conflagration. man, and returned to itself again. The text has
come down without a title, and was named by the
ee ERAS THOMOiGy first editors, on account of its division into three
The act of knowledge, which takes place first parts of different length, the Tripartite Tractate (I,
on the highest plane of the Aeons, secondly outside 5). Part 1 (51, 1-104, 3) describes the Father and

--- Page 577 ---
Ils3
VALENTINUS AND VALENTINIANS
his emanations and the fate of the Logos; Part 2 in System B, in the encounter with the Redeemer,
(104, 14-108, 12) is devoted to the creation of man; whose incarnation in body and soul is emphasized;
and Part 3 (108, 13-138, 27) to soteriology and in a similar way, the Treatise on the Resurrection
eschatology. With 88 pages it is one of the longest (NHCI, 4, 44, 13-15) states that the “Son of man”
of the Nag Hammadi texts, and also one of the has taken on flesh. The rather conventional inter-
best-preserved. Until now, no attempt to attribute pretation of the Paradise story is also interesting:
it to an author has met with universal consent; the the expulsion was willed insofar as man must learn
author seems to have come to terms with the the consequence of ignorance — death — so that he
Church’s criticism of the Valentinian teachings, can appreciate the blessing of its overcoming.
and perhaps under Origen’s influence to have Especially striking is the fact that the “psychics”,
attempted a new version of the myth in the 3rd who are divided into several groups, should have
century AD, in order to minimize the doctrinal dif- the same expectation on the other side as the
ference between the “majority church” and Valen- “pneumatics” (123, 21-29). Not without reason
tinianism. The most important points at which he does the text end with a hymn to the Revealer (138,
diverges from the system as transmitted by Ire- 22-27): “...the Lord, the Savior, the Redeemer of
naeus, or makes different emphases, are as follows. all those belonging to the one filled with Love,
The unity of God is emphasized (as in System B): he through his Holy Spirit from now through all gen-
alone is responsible for the existence and the being erations forever and ever’.
of the cosmos. “Son” and “Church” are his first
creations (not presented as syzygies), which cause 9. PTOLEMAEUS
all the other Aeons to appear and which embrace After Irenaeus had excerpted the myth (with its
them. These are not thirty Aeons organized in variants) from the available ‘writings of the pupils
pairs, but the entirety of all divine powers. The of Valentinus’ (AH, I, Preface), he tried to show the
author chooses an astonishing image to explain contradictory nature of the Valentinian doctrines
their unity and multiplicity (58, 21-29): ‘Those (I, 11-21). Beside Valentinus, Marcus, and some
which exist have come forth from the Son and the un-named ones, he also mentions Ptolemaeus and
Father like kisses, because of the multitude of some his school (I, 12, 1). Unfortunately he mentions
who kiss one another ..., the kiss being a unity, no more than that the highest God brought forth
although it involves many kisses’. Their creation is the first pair of Aeons, Nous and Truth, with the
not understood as a temporal beginning, but as the help of two (creative) states of mind (diatheseis):
transition from a merely potential existence (in the through his Thinking and Willing (cf. Gospel of
mind of the Father) to an actual one in the con- Truth, 37, 13ff.). Here the Aeons are seen as the
summation of God’s self-knowledge. Thereby the product of God’s thought and will, whereas Tertul-
Father is understood as static, the Son as “spreading lian reports that Prolemaeus understood the Aeons
himself”; this points to the Platonic-Pythagorean as self-subsistent beings (personae substantiae)
doctrine of the transition from “unity” to “dual- outside God (Adv. Val., 4, 2); possibly the Valen-
ity”, and to the doctrine illustrated by Numenius of tinian doctrine (System B) was meant, according to
a first Nous at rest and a second Nous in motion which God stands without a companion beside the
(cf. Valentinian Exposition, NHC XI, 2, 22, 21ff.). other Aeon-syzygies. How Ptolemaeus’s myth con-
The crisis of the divine does not condemn the tinued remains unknown. Nor is anything more
female Sophia, but the male Logos, though he acts known of his life. Most unclear is the question of
from similar motives; it is said that his actions are whether the Ptolemaeus named by Justin in his sec-
free, and in concord with the will of the Father (77, ond Apology as having suffered martyrdom in
6-11): ‘It is not fitting to criticize the movement, Rome around 152 AD is identical with the Valen-
which is the Logos, but it is fitting that we should tinian Ptolemaeus (Apol. 2, 9). The only certain
say, about the movement of the Logos, that it is a source is his Letter to Flora (Epiphanius, Panarion,
cause of an organization which has been destined 33, 3-7), in which Ptolemaeus treats the Penta-
to come about’. After his change (metanoia), the teuch, the first five books of the Old Testament, in
Logos divides (cf. the duplicated Sophia), and part pretentious style and with a methodical philosoph-
of him returns to the Pleroma. The “Redeemer”, ical dissection. The author of the Law, he says, is
called “Son”, enlightens the lower Logos, who now the Demiurge, who stands in the middle between
orders the lower world (oikonomia) with the help the perfect Father-God and the Devil (which shows
of the (ignorant) Demiurge which he has created an anti-Marcionist tendency). The Demiurge, in
(103, 4-5): ‘... whom he too used, as a hand and contrast with the perfectly good Father, is only just.
as a mouth and as if he were his face’. The different However, not only the Demiurge but also > Moses
classes of mankind first distinguish themselves, as and the oldest of the Hebrews were responsible for

--- Page 578 ---
VALENTINUS AND VALENTINIANS 1154
parts of the Law. Within the parts given by the with the various people who converse with Jesus.
Demiurge one should distinguish three types: a) Man consists of soul and body. If the soul rules over
the Ten Commandments as pure lawgiving, which the body and follows the divine will through its
the Savior, the son of Father-God, completed (the own free decision, it attains a limited salvation, like
lawgiving of the Demiurge, therefore, having been John the Baptist or the son of the royal official
imperfect); b) the laws involving injustice (e.g., (John 4:46-53, Prg. 40, Origen, XIII, 60); the soul
“An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth”), which the of the “choic,” on the other hand, is subject to bod-
Savior repealed; c) symbolic or typical laws, 1.e. the ily urges, so that he deserves to be called the son of
directions for worship, to which the Savior gave a the Devil. The only one who can attain gnostic
spiritual meaning (fasting, for instance, means knowledge is he whose soul carries a pneumatic
abstinence from all evil deeds). The criterion of the seed within it; but as in the myth related above,
latter two types is the Savior’s words and conduct; even this kind of soul is in a state of ignorance and
with his appearance, the age of symbols and images sin before the coming of the Redeemer: its divine
ends and that of truth begins. At the end of the let- core must be illuminated. Heracleon finds this des-
ter, Ptolemaeus refers to the myth, which explains tiny of the “pneumatic” illustrated in the story of
how the middle, the material, and evil could come the Samaritan woman (John 4:1-42, Frg. 17-23).
forth from the perfect good. As in Valentinus, the Her six lovers represent her entanglement in mate-
letter gives evidence of Platonic trains of thought, rial evils; but she seeks to be freed from it and
which are blended with the interpretation of the comes to Jacob’s Well: she hopes to find God by
biblical text. practicing obedience to the Law. This attempt can-
not succeed; it is only in the encounter with the
10. HERACLEON Revealer that she can recognize her ignorance, the
Heracleon is only mentioned by Irenaeus once, cause of her former sins, and overcome it. Her
in passing (AH, 2, 4, 1), yet Clement calls him knowledge is described in the image of the uniting
the ‘most eminent’ representative of the school of her soul with her heavenly companion. Only
(Strom., IV, 71, 1; cf. Origen, Comm. on John, Il, thus can the soul find its original “fullness” and
14). He must have flourished in the second half of attain salvation and immortality.
the 2nd century, but it is not known where (at
Rome and/or Alexandria?). Apparently “memo- him THEODOTUS
randa” (hypomnemata) were made from his exege- Theodotus the Valentinian also remains a shad-
sis of John, which Origen cites in his commentary owy figure. Among Clement’s works are preserved
on John’s Gospel (48 fragments) and criticizes ‘extracts [epitomai] from Theodotus and from the
(Heracleon’s interpretation of Luke 12, 8-11; see teachings of the so-called Eastern school of Valenti-
above). We do not know how extensive and thor- nus’s time’. We cannot be certain from this that
ough this exegesis was, but it probably began with Theodotus was Valentinus’s contemporary. Hip-
John 1:3. This might suggest that Heracleon was polytus mentions a Theodotus from Byzantium
silent about his Aeon doctrine, because in his exe- (‘the Cobbler or Leather-seller’) and a Theodotus
gesis he was addressing a general public. In his the Banker (Hippolytus, Refutatio, VII, 35f.), but
interpretation, which also draws on the other the teachings ascribed to them have little agree-
gospels, Paul, and the Old Testament, there is a ment with those in Clement’s Excerpta, in which it
myth in the background whose exact form can no is very difficult to decide which extracts are attrib-
longer be reconstructed. What is clear is the dis- utable to Theodotus. Beside portions that contain
paragement of the Demiurge who is also the law- Clement’s own arguments, others are ascribed to
giver, as opposed to the highest God. Beneath him the Valentinians in general (also introduced by
is the Devil (Diabolos), who symbolizes matter and “They say”); the parallel version to Irenaeus’s myth
its powers. The Logos takes part in the creation of is unfortunately given without any indication of
the world and of man; he is the ‘true creator’ (Frg. origin (Excerpta, 43, 2-65). A few extracts are
22, Origen, XIII, 19). Heracleon emphasizes the introduced with “Theodotus says”, or “he says”.
historical significance of the coming of Christ: Among these is an interpretation of ICor. 15:29, on
‘Now at last he is here’ (Frg. 8, Origen, VI, 39); baptism for the dead. This applies to the angels,
henceforth the Old Testament can be understood as who have themselves baptized for the sake of the
an image of salvation history. The chief message of human pneuma-sparks that represent their other
the surviving fragments concerns anthropology halves. The angels need this pneumatic part,
and soteriology. The three classes of men, “pneu- because only thus can they ascend (ibid., 35). The
matics”, “psychics”, and “choics”, are identified “Mother” brought forth these pneuma-sparks as

--- Page 579 ---
EI§5 VALENTINUS AND VALENTINIANS
her minor children, who first acquire a “father” he gives its date as ‘not long ago’ (ibid.), he pre-
through their formation by the Savior (ibid., 68). sumably means that it does not come from the time
The Church represents the totality of the sparks of the canonical gospels, but is of recent date. The
that were elected before the world’s foundation original language of the text was probably Greek;
(ibid., 41, rf.). Like the angels, Jesus was baptized a Latin word also occurs (forma in 27, 2; cf. Trac-
when the “Son” or “Monogenes” descended on tatus Tripartitus, 55, 8 and 61, 12), and there are
him in the form of adove (Excerpta, 22, 1-3; cf. 26, stylistic reminiscences of Oriental wisdom-litera-
1). Jesus’ visible parts, according to Theodotus, ture and hymnody. There is much debate about the
stem from Sophia; the Logos clothed himself with genre of the text, which was first described as a
them when he descended (Excerpta, 1, 1f.); a psy- homiletic reflection on the good news brought by
chic Christ seems not to be envisaged here. His the Redeemer. This seems to be the sense of the
archetype is the Christ whom Sophia brought forth work’s title “On the Gospel of Truth”; the author
after her exit from the Pleroma, but who left her attempts therein to explain the significance for
and rose to the Pleroma. At his request, Jesus, the mankind of the true message of the Redeemer,
Paraclete, was sent to Sophia (Excerpta, 32, 2f., cf. which is presented in the (canonical) gospels that
23, 2 and 39). Sophia however, after Christ’s ascen- he cites. At the end, the author speaks in the first
sion, brought forth the inferior Demiurge (ibid., person to his readers (42, 41-43, 5): ‘It is not fitting
33, 3). This doctrine of Christ’s origin replaces the for me, having come to be in the resting-place,
duplication of Sophia in Irenaeus’s account (or the to speak of anything else..., it is fitting to be
division of the Logos in Tripartite Treatise, NHC I, concerned at all times with the Father of the
5); the ascending Christ corresponds to the higher All and the true brothers’. A structural analysis of
Sophia, the one left behind to the lower. Irenaeus the text is almost impossible, since the author’s
specifies that this was Valentinus’s own teaching argument has no clear sections and is interwoven
(Irenaeus, AH, I, 11, 1); likewise the Valentinian with numerous repetitions, anticipations, reinforce-
Exposition (NHC XI, 2, 33, 35-37) says: “These ments, and digressions. The text can be regarded as
things Sophia endured after her son had hastened a demythologized variant of the Valentinian myth,
upwards’. It is possible that in this detail Theo- for the systematic main points concerning the
dotus stayed true to the mythic design of his divine doctrine, especially the question of theodicy,
teacher. In another interesting detail, Theodotus anthropology, and soteriology, are not given in the
speaks against abstinence from human reproduc- form of a cosmogonic story, but in a didactic form
tion: the latter is needed because only thus can the that uses a rich and very demanding imagery, and
elect seeds come into the world, so as to find contains many reminiscences of the New Testa-
knowledge there (ibid., 67). A longer extract is ment scriptures. Consequently, no distinction is
devoted to fate (heimarmene), which determines made between the three levels: Pleroma, heaven
human life together with the various powers that and earth; the Aeons are simultaneously the human
manifest in the stars; with baptism their rulership pneuma-sparks, and the transcendent Son and
ends. Baptism is understood as rebirth, and this Name of God is simultaneously the earthly Jesus.
also is an act of knowledge: ‘It is not the bath alone This avoidance of a narration unfolding in time
that frees, but also the knowledge of who we were, is particularly visible in the figure of “error” {in
what we became, where we were, wherein we were Greek, the feminine plané), which characterizes the
thrown, whither we strive, wherefrom we are cosmos and human existence before the coming of
freed, what are signified by birth and rebirth’. the Redeemer. “Error” and its associated emotions
(ibid., 78, 2). He who attains this knowledge in arise because the Pleroma, the entirety of divine
baptism receives the ‘seal of truth’ and is untouch- powers or emanations, is ignorant of God, who
able by all other powers. as in the Tripartite Tractate appears as a unity
(“Monas”) without a female element (22, 27-33):
12. THE GOSPEL OF TRUTH ‘It was a great wonder that they were in the Father,
The most famous scripture of the Valentinian not knowing him, and (that) they were able to
school is the Gospel of Truth (NHCI, 3), so called come forth by themselves, since they were unable
from its incipit. Irenaeus confirms this title as to comprehend or to know the one in whom they
Valentinian and mentions the work’s difference were’. As in the myth, ignorance is needed because
from the canonical gospels (AH, III, 11, 9; proba- it is the prerequisite for the search for God (17, 4f.).
bly derived from that is Ps.-Tertullian, Adversus Only because God at first withheld knowledge
omnes haereses, 4, 6). According to Irenaeus, the (envy having no part in it), could he enable the
text must have been written before 175 A.D.; when return to him in perfect knowledge (19, 4-6). The

--- Page 580 ---
VALENTINUS AND VALENTINIANS I156
cause of the godless world lies in God, even if he did 1985 @A.E. Brooke (ed.), The Fragments of Heracleon
not create it (18, 1-3): ‘Oblivion did not come into (Texts and Studies I, 4), Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
existence from the Father, although it did indeed versity Press, 1891 # W. Foerster (trans.), Gnosis: A
Selection of Gnostic Texts, vol. 1: Patristic Evidence
come into existence because of him’. The argu-
(Eng. trans. R. McL. Wilson), Oxford: Clarendon
ments about “plané” thus substitute for the myth Press, 1972 (German edition 1969) @ J.C. Fredouille
of fallen Sophia and the Demiurge. It is interesting (ed. and trans.), Tertullien: Contre les Valentiniens (SC
that beauty is counted among the works of “error” 280-281): Paris: Cerf, 1980-1981 # C.W. Hedrick
(17, r9f.); it seduces those situated in the middle et al. (ed. and trans.), Nag Hammadi Codices XI, XI,
(man’s interior). But the Son and the Holy Spirit XIII (NHS 28), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1990 @ K. Holl (ed.),
Epiphanius: Panarion (GCS Epiphan. I-II), 2nd rev.
enlighten them and give them truth instead of
ed. by J. Dummer, Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1980 @
(earthly) beauty. Only then do they advance from a B. Layton (trans.), The Gnostic Scriptures, Garden
potential to an actual existence. Through the reve- City, New York: Doubleday, 1987 # M. Marcovich
lation of the Son ‘the aeons may know him and (ed.), Hippolytos: Refutatio omnium haeresium (Patris-
cease laboring in search of the father, resting there tische Texte und Studien, 25), Berlin/New York: De
in him, knowing that this is the rest’ (24, 16-20). Gruyter, 1986 @ J.E. Ménard (ed. and trans.), L Exposé
The author teaches the predestination of those who valentinienne: Les fragments sur le Baptéme et sur
lEucharistie (NH XI, 2) (BCNH, “Textes”, 14), Que-
come to knowledge (e.g. 21, 26f.; cf. Treatise ofthe
bec: Les Presses de |’Université Laval, 1985 K.U.
Resurrection, NHCI, 4, 46, 25-29): ‘We are elected Plisch (ed. and trans.), Die Auslegung der Erkenntnis
to salvation and redemption, since we are predes- (NHC XI, 1) (TU 142), Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1996
tined from the beginning not to fall into the fool- @ E. Preuschen (ed.), Origenes: Johanneskommentar
ishness of those who are without knowledge’. (GCS Orig. IV), Leipzig: Hinrichs 1903 @ G. Quispel
Beside the chosen there is only the group of “mate- (ed. and trans.), Ptolémée: Lettre a Flora (SC 24 bis),
Paris: Cerf, 19667 # J.M. Robinson/R. Smith et al.rials” (31, 1), who will perish; a middle group of
(trans.), The Nag Hammadi Library in English, Lei-
Church Christians is not mentioned (cf. Valenti-
den: Brill, 19964 # A. Rousseau & L. Doutreleau
nian Exposition, NHC XI, 1, where however the (ed. and trans.), Irénée de Lyon: Contre les hérésies,
middle “psychic” seems lacking). This circum- Livre I (2 vols.) (SC 263-264), Paris: Cerf, 1979 @
stance may point to the origin of the text at a time FE. Sagnard (ed. and trans.) Extraits de Théodote
when the division of the Valentinians from the (SC 23), Paris: Cerf, 1970 H.M. Schenke (ed. and
majority church was not yet complete, or else it trans.), Das Philippus-Evangelium (NHC II, 3) (TU
may be an indication that it is an “exoteric” scrip- 143), Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1997 @ idem. et al.,
Nag Hammadi Deutsch (GCS N.F. 8), Berlin: De
ture that sought not to alienate the members of the
Gruyter, 2001 @ O. Stahlin & L. Friichtel (eds.),
majority. The emphasis on the vicarious death on Clemens Alexandrinus: Stromata (GCS Clem. II-III),
the cross may also point in this direction: “error” Berlin, Akademie Verlag, 19854 (Ii) and 1970? (III)
persecutes and kills the Revealer, but in doing so E. Thomassen & L. Painchaud (ed. and trans.), Le
can only affect its own work, the body. Jesus traité tripartite (BCNH, “Textes”, 19), Quebec: Les
sheds the “perishable rags” and clothes himself Presses de l’Université Laval, 1989 # W. Volker
(ed.), Quellen zur Geschichte der christlichen Gnosis,
with “imperishability” (20, 31f.), cf. Treatise on
Tubingen: Mohr, 1932, 57-141 # F. Williams (trans.),
the Resurrection (NHC I, 4, 45, 14-17): ‘The
The Panarion of Epiphanius (2 vols., NHS 35 and 36),
Savior swallowed up death.... for he put aside Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1987 and 1994.
the world which is perishing. He transformed
himself into an imperishable Aeon’. In the same Lit.: M.R. Desjardins, Sin in Valentinianism (Soc.
way, those who attain the repose of knowledge of Bibl. Lit. Diss. Ser., ro8), Atlanta: Scholars Press,
simultaneously cast off lack, i.e. the ignorance that 1990 @ M. Guarducci, “Valentiniani a Roma”, in:
eadem, Scritti scelti sulla religione greca e romana e sul
turned into matter. From the experience of salva-
Christianismo (EPRO 98), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1983,
tion comes the urge to pass on this knowledge (32, 353-379 J. Holzhausen, Der Mythos vom Menschen
35-37): ‘Speak of the truth with those who search im hellenistischen Agypten (Theophaneia 33), Boden-
for it and of knowledge to those who have com- heim: Athenaum-Hain-Hanstein, 1994 # K. Kosch-
mitted sin in their error’, and, in one’s own case, orke, “Patristische Materialien zur Spatgeschichte der
not to abandon it (33, 15-21): ‘Do not return to valentinianischen Gnosis”, in: M. Krause (ed.), Gnosis
what you have vomited to eat it. Do not be moths, and Gnosticism (NHS 17), Leiden: E.J. Brill, 198x,
120-139 @ P. Lampe, Die stadtrémischen Christen in
do not be worms, for you have already cast it off.
den ersten beiden Jahrhunderten (Wissenschaftliche
Do not become a (dwelling) place for the devil, for Untersuchungen zum NT 18), Tiibingen: Mohr, 19892
you have already destroyed him’. @ C. Markschies, Valentinus Gnosticus? (WUNT 65)
Tubingen: Mohr, 1992 @ C. Markschies, “Valentinian
H.W. Attridge et al. (ed. and trans.), Nag Hammadi Gnosticism: Toward the anatomy of a school”, in: J.D.
Codex I (The Jung Codex) (NHS 22), Leiden: E.J. Brill, Turner & A.M. McGuire (eds.), The Nag Hammadi

--- Page 581 ---
1157 VAUGHAN
Library after fifty years (NHMS 44), Leiden: E.J. Brill, was evicted from his living in 1650, Vaughan was
1997, 401-438 @ B. Layton, The Rediscovery of Gnos- already living in London. In May of that year
ticism, Vol. 1: The School of Valentinus, Leiden: E.J.
Samuel Hartlib (ca. 1600-1662) noted the publica-
Brill, 1980 @ G. Liidemann, “Zur Geschichte des
tion of Vaughan’s Anthroposophia Theomagica, altesten Christentums in Rom”, ZNW 70 (1979), 86-
114 A. Orbe, Estudios Valentinianos, 5 vols., Rome: described its author as having for some years ‘tried
Gregoriana, 1955-1966 @ E. Pagels, The Johannine Chymicall or Physical Conclusions’, and as living
Gospel in Gnostic Exegesis: Heracleon’s Commentary with Thomas Henshaw at Kensington ‘where they
on John (Soc. of Bibl. Lit. Monograph Series, 17), lay their heads and hands together to see what they
Nashville-New York: Abingdon Press, 1973 ¢ can produce’. Kensington is the first of five of
S. Pétrement, Le Dieu séparé: Les origines du gnosti-
Vaughan’s known London residences. Henshaw
cism, Paris: Cerf 1984 (Eng. trans. London 1991)
@ G. Quispel, “The original doctrine of Valentinus was one of the founding fellows of the Royal Soci-
the Gnostic”, Vigiliae Christianae 50 (1996), 327-352 ety, like Vaughan an ardent Royalist, who, after
@ EL.M.M. Sagnard, La gnose valentinienne et being taken prisoner and given the gentleman’s
le témoignage de S. Irénée, Paris: Vrin, 1947 ¢ option of pledging not to fight again or being
C. Scholten, Martyrium und Sophiamythos im Gnos- confined, travelled on the Continent (from 1644-
tizismus (Jahrbuch fiir Antike und Christentum, 1645 with Evelyn in Italy). Hartlib said of Hen-
Erg.-Band 15), Miinster: Aschendorffsche Verlags-
shaw that both his parents were ‘great chymists’,
buchhandlung, 1987 @ idem, “Gibt es Quellen zur
Sozialgeschichte der Valentinianer Roms?”, ZNW 79 and that he had a substantial library of alchemical
(1988), 244-261 @ S.G. Stead, “The Valentinian myth works, printed and in manuscript. We also learn
of the Sophias”, Journal of Theological Studies 20 from Hartlib that in 1650 Dr. Robert Child (ca.
(1969), 75-104 @ H. Strutwolf, Gnosis als System: 1612-1654) was endeavouring to form a ‘chymical
Zur Rezeption der valentinianischen Gnosis bei club’ of which Henshaw and Vaughan were to be
Origenes (Forschungen zur Kirchen- und Domenge- members; its purposes included the collection of
schichte, 56), G6ttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht,
alchemical [> alchemy] books and manuscripts
1993 @ J.A. Williams, Biblical Interpretation in the
Gnostic Gospel of Truth from Nag Hammadi (Soc. of with a view to publishing them in one volume.
Bibl. Lit. Diss. Series, 79), Atlanta; Scholars Press, Later in that year Child told Hartlib that Henshaw
1988 @ M.A. Williams, Rethinking “Gnosticism”: was about to put in to practice ‘a model of [a]
An Argument for Dismantling a Dubious Category, Christian Learned Society’, referring to the Chris-
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996. tianae Societatis Imago ot > J.V. Andreae, trans-
lated in 1647 by John Hall as A Model of a
JENS HOLZHAUSEN Christian Society. Its members were to have all
things in common, dedicating themselves to devo-
Vaughan, Thomas (Eugenius Philalethes), tion and studies, separating themselves from the
*1621 Newton-by-Usk, Breconshire world by leading a severe life as to diet and ap-
(Wales), t 27.2.1666 Albury, Oxfordshire parel; they were to have a laboratory and ‘strive to
do all the good they can to their neighbourhood’. It
Younger twin brother of the poet Henry is likely that this club was actually formed, but
Vaughan (1621-1695). Vaughan was educated pri- Vaughan is unlikely to have lived monastically for
vately by Matthew Herbert (ca. 1600-1660), very long. He was married (28.9.1651) to Rebecca
admitted to Jesus College, Oxford in May 1638, (t 17.4.1658), probably the daughter of Dr. Timothy
proceeded to the BA degree in 1642, and continued Archer (1597-1672) and his wife Rebekah Beedles
his studies there for some years thereafter. He of Cambridgeshire. Archer, the rector of Mapper-
fought in the Civil War on the Royalist side, and sall in Bedfordshire, was an ardent royalist. It
was taken prisoner at Rowton Heath in 1645. He seems apparent from the MS notebook that the
became rector of his home parish of Llansantff- marriage was happy, and that Rebecca partici-
raed ca. 1645, and was evicted in 1650 under the pated in Vaughan’s study of alchemy.
provisions of the Act for the Propagation of the In 1661 Vaughan was embroiled in a legal ile.
Gospel in Wales. The charges against him were arising from his practice of alchemy, of which the
more serious than for any other Breconshire incum- outcome is unknown. He did not return to his
bent, describing him as ‘a common drunkard, a ecclesiastical living after the Restoration, but
common swearer, no preacher, a whoremaster and continued to work as an alchemist, most prob-
in arms personally against the Parliament’. The ably as an assistant to Sir Robert Moray (1608/
first charge was apparently accurate; an entry in 1609-1673), first President of the Royal Society.
Vaughan’s MS notebook refers to his having ‘rev- Henry Vaughan wrote that Vaughan ‘gave all his
elled away many yeares in drinking’. By the time he bookes & manuscripts’ to Moray; Aubrey reported

--- Page 582 ---
VAUGHAN 1158
Moray as saying that he had buried Vaughan ‘at by neo-Calvinists of the period, that the non-
Albury’. Vaughan’s pseudonym, Eugenius Phila- human creation is of value only insofar as it is
lethes, appears on all his title pages, except that of useful to human beings. The question of how we
Aula Lucis, where he appears as S.N. a Modern should consider and treat the non-human world is
speculator. He had some posthumous reputation; a contested area in our time, in, for example, the
substantial passages were transcribed into com- confrontations between environmentalists and log-
monplace books; and he was read in German trans- ging companies. It is clear from their work where
lations through the 18th century. Vaughan and his brother would have stood on this
Vaughan dedicated his first published work to issue; the non-human for them was not merely
the Brothers of the Rosy Cross [> Rosicrucian- instrumental, but an object of admiration, rever-
ism], and he republished two Rosicrucian tracts ence and love. ‘God is not absent from his crea-
with a substantial preface. His title Magia Adamica tures’, Vaughan wrote, after considering the
is a clear allusion to > Robert Fludd’s Philosophia wisdom of the spider and the hare (Anima Magica
Moysaica. He praised > Cornelius Agrippa in Abscondita, 112).
Anthroposophia Theomagica, Anima Magica
Abscondita and Magia Adamica; in the last-men- Anthroposophia Theomagica and Anima Magica Abs-
tioned work he also praises Libanius Gallus, > condita, London: Humphrey Blunden, 1650 # Magia
Adamica and The Man-Mouse Taken in a Trap, and
Johannes Trithemius, > Francesco Giorgio da
tortur’d to death for gnawing the Margins of Eugenius
Veneto, Michael Sendivogius and the kabbalistic Philalethes, London: Humphrey Blunden, 1650 ¢@
scholar > Johann Reuchlin, who was a major Lumen de Lumine and The Second Wash: or The
source. The first doctrine he announces is that of Moore Scour’d once more, London: Humphrey Blun-
the pre-existence, and the royalty, of the soul: a den, 1651 @ Aula Lucis, London: William Leake, 1652
clear attack on Calvinist views. He followed > @ The Fame & Confession of the Fraternity of R:C:,
Paracelsus in substituting the three “elements” of Commonly, of the Rosy Cross, London: Giles Calvert,
1652 Euphrates, London: Humphrey Moseley, 1655
sulphur, salt and mercury for Aristotle’s four. Like
@ Thalia Rediviva, London: Roger LEstrange, 1678
his brother Henry, he praised the state of child- (F7r — G7r poems by Vaughan) # Aqua Vitae: Non
hood, but stressed the child’s desire for knowledge Vitis (British Library MS Sloane 1741; mostly written
rather than his innocence. Again as in Henry’s between Rebecca’s death and April 1659, this note-
work, the historical figure of Jesus is less important book contains a record of the alchemical work in
to Vaughan than was Christ conceived cosmically, which they had collaborated, and accounts of dreams
as in St. John’s Prologue and in Colossians 1:17. in the year following her death) @ A.E. Waite (ed.), The
Works of Thomas Vaughan, London: Theosophical Pub-
Christ’s redemption is for the whole Creation, -
lishing House, r919 @ Alan Rudrum (ed.), The Works
again, in mid-17th century England, an anti- of Thomas Vaughan, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984.
Calvinist position (Anthroposophia Theomagica,
56). See also, in this respect, Euphrates, 517-518: ‘I Lit.: Noel L. Brann, “The Conflict between Reason and
fear not to say, that Nature is so much the business Magic in Seventeenth-Century England: A Case Study
of Scripture, that to me, the Spirit of God, in those of the Vaughan-More Debate”, Huntington Library
Quarterly 43 (1980), 103-126 @ O.E. Crawshaw,sacred Oracles, seems not only to mind the Resti-
“That Slidying Science, Alchemy”, Anglo-Welsh
tution of Man in particular, but even the Redemp-
Review 18 (1970), 146-155 @ O.E. Crawshaw, “The
tion of Nature in generall. We must not therefore Relationship Between the Works of Thomas and Henry
confine this Restitution to our own Species’. Like Vaughan”, Poetry Wales 11:2 (1975), 73-97 # Thomas
others of his time, Vaughan thought of the Bible, and Rebecca Vaughan (Donald R. Dickson [ed.]),
and the oral tradition of its commentators, as a Aqua Vite: Non Vitis: Or, The radical Humiditie of
source of scientific wisdom; on the other hand he Nature: Mechanically, and Magically dissected By the
Conduct of Fire, and Ferment Sloane: (British Library
sought out scientific truth by “chymical” experi-
MS, 1741), Tempe: Medieval & Renaissance Texts
ments. He was an animist, opposed to the peri-
& Studies, 2001 # Donald R. Dickson, “Thomas
patetics, who ‘look on God, as they do on Vaughan and the Iatrochemical Revolution”, The Sev-
Carpenters, who build with Stone and Timber, enteenth Century 15 (2000), 18-31 # Donald R. Dick-
without any infusion of life’ (The Man-Mouse, son, “The Alchemistical Wife: The Identity of Thomas
249). His view of chemistry is in line with his Vaughan’s ‘Rebecca’”, The Seventeenth Century 13
Arminian, anti-Calvinist theology, salvation being (1998), 34-46 @ Donald R. Dickson, The Tessera of
Antilia, Utopian Brotherhoods & Secret Societies in
‘nothing else but transmutation’ (Lumen de
the Early Seventeenth Century, Leiden: E.J. Brill, etc.
Lumine, 357). Perhaps the most interesting thing 1998 @ Gertrude Kelly Hamilton, Three Worlds of
about the Vaughans, from a modern perspective, is Light: The Philosophy of Light in Marsilio Ficino,
their opposition to the view, commonly expressed Thomas Vaughan and Henry Vaughan, University of

--- Page 583 ---
I1s§9 VILLARD DE HONNECOURT
Rochester Unpubl. Ph.D. thesis, 1974 @ EE. Hutchin- have taken an interest in this outstanding manu-
son, Henry Vaughan: A Life and Interpretation, script. Some of its drawings have been reproduced
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1947 # Lotte Mulligan,
many times, sometimes with errors, and many arti-
““Reason’, ‘Right Reason’, and ‘Revelation’ in Mid-
cles concerning it have appeared. Viollet-le-Duc, Seventeenth Century England”, in: Brian Vickers (ed.),
Occult and Scientific Mentalities in the Renaissance, notably, cited the drawings of Villard, and works
Cambridge: Cambridge U.P., 1984 @ Alan Rudrum, on the history of technology allude to some of the
“Thomas Vaughan’s Lumen de Lumine: An Interpreta- machines represented in this manuscript, whose
tion of Thalia”, in: Luanne Frank (ed.), Literature and reduced format and subsequent binding in folios
the Occult, Arlington: University of Texas, 1977, 234- suggest the description of “sketchbook”. Some fac-
243 @ Thomas Willard, “The Rosicrucian manifestos
similes have appeared after that of Lassus. A fac-
in Britain”, The Papers of the Bibliographical Society
simile (annotated by Alain Erlande Brandenburg, of America 77:4 (1983), 489-495.
Jean Gimpel, Régine Pernoud and Roland Bech-
ALAN RUDRUM mann), accessible to the public, was published in
France in 1986 and reproduced in Italy and Spain.
The only study of all the drawings that appeared
Venise, Jean-Marie de > Ragon de
before the 1980s is that of Hans Hahnloser pub-
Bettignies, Jean-Marie lished in 1935 in German. The present author’s
most important contribution, more specifically
Vilanova, Arnau de > Arnau de focused on the technical and mnemotechnical
Vilanova drawings, was published in r99r.
The social position, the functions, and the life of
Villard are unknown. The period of his activity, the
Villard de Honnecourt and the first third of the 13th century, can be determined to
Medieval Craft within a few decades by what he represented in his
manuscript. In this era, the most beautiful cathe-
Villard de Honnecourt, who, in his manuscript drals rose in Western Europe, later known as
written in the French of Picardy (Bibliothéque “Gothic”. Also unknown is whether Villard was a
Nationale de France Ms fr 19093), spelled his native of Honnecourt, an inhabitant of that small
name “Wilars”, is known only by this collection of town, or a member of the Benedictine community
small parchment leaves (14 x 22,5 cm. on average), of the abbey, the heart of that urban area. He
bound in a leather portfolio. Many folios have dis- appears as an expert in matters of building and
appeared since the 13th century, when the author machinery, having traveled in France and other
assembled the drawings and texts executed in vari- countries, such as Switzerland and Hungary,
ous places to form, as he called it, a book. Remain- sketching whatever seemed interesting to him, or
ing are thirty-three folios (66 pages) out of about could be useful for the projects for which he was
fifty that it must have included originally. It was providing advice or assistance.
discovered in 1825, in a collection from the abbey An artist with a gift for drawing, Villard was
of St. Germain des Prés. The first facsimile, anno- attracted to all that seemed unusual or new to him
tated by J.B. Lassus, published in 1858, was repro- in every area of construction and mechanics. His
duced, soon afterward, with commentaries in lively sketches evoke characters of daily life, but
English, by Robert Willis. also scenes or traditional figures that we find again
Religious scenes, traditional figures, machines and in the sculpture of that period. Some drawings con-
various engines, automata, formulas for geometry cern churches in construction in his time, such as a
and surveying, procedures for stonecutting, models tower of the cathedral of Laon, or the apsidal
of building construction, church furniture, partial chapels of Reims, with technical details concerning
plans of religious structures, devices for vaulting, pillars, mullions, and ribs. His manuscript, :in
surveys of existing buildings, templates for stone ele- which we find the first example of the word
ments, figures of people and animals, drawings hav- “ogive”, contains plans of church apses, of which
ing both esoteric meanings and mnemonic purposes some correspond exactly to finished buildings, as
[> Mnemonics] are the subjects treated in this man- well as a model plan for a Cistercian church. He
uscript. It is a mine of information as much on tech- drew a curious rose for the cathedral of Lausanne
nical knowledge as on life in the 13th century and on and another recalling that of Chartres. He indicates
initiatory crafts associations, whose rituals have that he had been ‘sent’ to Hungary, where indeed at
been transmitted until the contemporary period. that period the Cistercians, come from France, had
A great many scholars, historians, and architects founded several abbeys.

--- Page 584 ---
VILLARD DE HONNECOURT I160
In the literature, Villard has been designated, prohibited groupings had to remain underground.
without any proof, as the architect, or at least a In the historical context, this hypothesis would be
participant in the construction, in the case of sev- plausible and, in the manuscript, some indications
enteen churches. He gave instructions — but we do tend to confirm it. At the beginning of the 12th cen-
not know in what capacity — for the construction of tury, crafts guilds officially existed in England,
the cathedral of Cambrai, and he may have taken including journeymen and apprentices, who met
part in that of the church of Vaucelles. He may have periodically and owed one another assistance. In
worked on the collegiate church of Saint Quentin, 1276, Emperor Rudolph of Habsburg granted a
whose interior layout resembles the survey that Vil- chart of freedoms to the stonemasons of Stras-
lard made in Reims. Moreover, researchers have bourg. However, the Authorities controlled these
found ona wall of this collegiate church an engrav- organizations, whose essential goals were not the
ing very analogous to a rose drawn by Villard and, interests of the workers, and dreaded the initiatives
more recently, a spiral similar to that sketched in and pressures that the workers could exercise to
the manuscript. In 1996, the present author dis- improve their condition. In France, on several
covered in the same church an engraving of arch occasions, from the 12th century, the authorities
stones applying a method of stonecutting described and the Church made a stand against the associa-
in the manuscript. Several plans by Villard corre- tions, confraternities, and organizations of solidar-
spond to those of finished churches, without ity requiring secrecy from their members, and
thereby providing any indication on his possible declared them prohibited, notably, in 1189, at the
contribution to these buildings. Council of Rouen, and in 1326, at the Council of
From the viewpoint of the history of technical Avignon. According to Martin Saint Léon, histo-
subjects, his drawings reveal the knowledge of the rian of compagnonnage, the municipal magistrates
builders of this period in the areas of geometry, of Amiens, at the end of the 13th century, forbade
stereotomy, and engineering, as well as their widely the city workers to meet in groups of more than
diverse centers of interest and the scope of their four and to have acommon treasury. In 1506, a rul-
competence. We perceive traces in them of the ing by the Chatelet, in Paris, reiterated the prohibi-
teachings of Euclid, Vitruvius, and the Roman agri- tion against clandestine meetings of workers. Only
mensors. The deciphering of the technical draw- the Corporations, instituted and organized under
ings in Villard de Honnecourt’s manuscript, which the control of the Authorities, were allowed.
had been neglected, despised, or misunderstood, The building workers, who moved frequently
show that the builders of this era possessed, in mat- because of the unpredictability in the progress of
ters of geometry and stereotomy, knowledge and construction sites, must have felt the need for
methods that could explain how they had been able organizations of mutual aid and information, indi-
to erect such impressive buildings. In the dedica- cating places where work was available and lodg-
tion meant for the professional people to whom he ings. Moreover, by belonging to such a society, the
bequeathed his work, Villard stated that it con- workers guaranteed their professional competence
tained many indications in matters of masonry and to the supervisors. For France, no documents sur-
construction. He also mentioned the method of vive on this subject. However, in the countries of
drawing, called le Trait, which prefigured descrip- Germanic language and in England, the existence
tive geometry and stereotomy, and made possible the of professional organizations uniting stonemasons
conception, the exact drawing, and the preliminary is attested, starting in the last third of the 14th cen-
cutting of works in wood and stone. In this manu- tury. The written documents record the customs of
script, we find the first mentions and examples of the these organizations, which seem to have been tol-
application of this art that, transmitted between erated in some countries, where the traditions were
initiates, was divulged only from the 16th and 17th less centralizing than were those of France. Specu-
centuries, by Philibert de l’?Orme, and then by lative > Freemasonry, which has united, since the
Mathurin Jousse, in a work with the revealing title: r7th century, adherents from every profession and
Le Secret d’Architecture (The Secret of Architec- often influential personalities, considers itself to
ture). This method is still used today by the “Com- have originated from such organizations of manual
pagnons du Devoir”. workers.
We must wonder whether Villard was already The engineer Franz Rziha, who surveyed, in Cen-
part of a workers’ association, of an initiatory tral Europe, some twelve hundred engraved monu-
nature, from which the “Compagnons du Devoir” ment markings, has found that they were placed in
would have issued in France. These were “opera- geometric patterns specific to the stonecutters of
tive”, that is, working manually, and their often- each of the regional “lodges” affiliated with the

--- Page 585 ---
TI61
VILLARD DE HONNECOURT
Germanic Baubiitte. He thinks that the lodges must triangle, whose superior angle measures 108 de-
have existed as early as the 12th century. On the grees, a number of which Francois Rabelais, in the
last of the four pages of Villard’s manuscript con- 16th century, evoked the symbolic value, reappears
cerning the Art of Geometry, a face is drawn in notably on the frontons ofthe “apprentices’ board”
a grid of squares. Over this is superimposed a and the “fellows’ board” of the Freemasons. More-
graphic, which resembles the marks drawn on the over, the present author has shown that this myste-
pattern corresponding to the Grand Lodge of Stras- rious Composition is constructed on a perfectly
bourg, which Rizha surveyed. Could this have been regular pentagonal star.
the personal mark of Villard? What indications, in With regard to the four pages representing peo-
the sketchbook of Villard, would make it possible ple and animals with geometrical designs, Villard
to suppose that he had been affiliated with such a specified that these are figures of the art of geome-
society, or, at least, been part of a profession prac- try, useful for working. Some have believed these
ticing certain rites of recognition and using certain figures to be a method to facilitate drawing, but
symbols that reappear, centuries later, among the they were in fact a memento of geometrical layouts.
Compagnons and the Freemasons, whose tradi- The same aim of memorization accounts for the
tions are sometimes similar? attribution to the celestial constellations of names
Two drawings from folio ror very exactly illus- that recall the arrangement of the component stars,
trate two rituals of recognition, which historians of and in the medieval Arabian and Western treatises
Compagnonnage describe in detail, notably Raoui on geometry, the attribution of imaginative names
Vergez, J. P. Bayard, and Francois Icher. Represen- to figures of Euclid.
tations of the same scenes appear on medieval These folios show two characteristic images of a
buildings in Poitiers. Various figures of both folios recognition ritual between compagnons, of which
18 and 19 refer to designs that are still known and the drawings recall various procedures for useful
used by certain Compagnons du Devoir. A collective designs, and are replete with symbols, only a few of
work on the cathedral of Lausanne, of which sev- which we still understand today. Other pages are
eral of the authors were Compagnons, compares also noteworthy. Thus, the “dice players” of folio
the designs employed with the drawings in Villard’s gr in fact represent a master and an apprentice, as
sketchbook. the dice indicate — a five-pointed star and a cross
The composition appearing in folio 6r of the framed by four dots, in the hand of the master,
manuscript is presented as ‘the sepulcher of a Sar- while the dice in the hand of the other person have
razin’, that is, of a pagan. No tomb corresponds to only dots. In folio 8, we see the inscription AGLA
this composition. On the contrary, it recalls the (corresponding to the Hebrew invocation, “Atha
frontispieces of some books by architects from the Gibor Leholam Adonai”, meaning, “You are eter-
Renaissance period, and certain compositions nally great, Lord”), which reappears in the works
appearing in medieval works, as well as the “trac- of some printers of the 14th and 15th centuries and
ing boards” of the Freemasons, of which Marc- would be that of a secret society of book artisans.
Reymond Larose has explained the symbolism. For All these indications form a body of evidence
the Compagnons, the word Sarrazin referred to sufficiently great for us to consider it probable that,
Hiram, a foreign architect called by King Solomon at the time of Villard of Honnecourt, there already
to build the Temple of Jerusalem. This page con- existed an initiatory association of builders, pos-
tains symbols that reappear in the traditions of the sessing rituals of recognition and a tradition,
Masons and the Compagnons: hence, the two expressed in symbols, to which different meanings
columns recalling those of the Temple, steps, ewers, may subsequently have been given, but which were
lilies, mallets, draperies, and pomegranates. The maintained.
two figures, on either side of what seems to be a
drawing board, appear to be holding, the one a Lit.: Carl E. Barnes Jr., Villard de Honnecourt, the
plumb line, and the other a set square. However, Artist and his Drawing: A Critical Bibliography,
these two basic tools are not shown, as though to Boston, 1982/1985) @ Jean-Pierre Bayard, Le com-
recall that the technique of le Trait is a secret. The pagnonnage en France, Paris: Payot, 1982, 227 @ Guy
Beaujouan & P. Cattin, “Philippe Eléphant”, Histoirecentral character, which is carrying a scepter rest-
littéraire de France, vol. 151, Paris, 1981, 285-362 @
ing on his left shoulder, is making the sign of the
R. Bechmann, Villard de Honnecourt, la pensée tech-
master with his right hand, the index and the little nique au XIII°"® siécle et sa communication, Paris:
finger extended, and the thumb folded back on the Picard, r991 (71993) @ idem, “Le Trait retrouvé”,
other fingers. The proportion of the fronton at the Pour la science 222 (1996) # idem, “Lart du Trait au
bottom of the drawing, in the shape of an isosceles XII siecle”, in: Arts et Sciences au Moyen-Age

--- Page 586 ---
VILLARD DE HONNECOURT I162
(Pour la Science, special issue, Paris 1996, 36-45) and religion. Thus, during his lifetime, he collected a
@ idem,“A New Interpretation of Folio 9r.in Vil- rich hebrew and kabbalistic library, part of which is
lard’s Manuscript”, 35th International Congress of today deposited in the Paris National Library. He
Medieval Studies, Kalamazoo (4-7 May 2000) ¢
was also in close and lasting contact with the most
Georges Duby, Daniel Anet, Pierre Margot, Raoul
famousJewish and Christian representatives of Vergez, Henri Stierlin, Alfred Herman, Jean-Pierre
Laubscher & Henri Cevey, Merveilleuse Cathédrale Renaissance humanism, from A. Giustiniani (1470-
de Lausanne, Lausanne: Ed. du Grand Pont, 1975 1536), > P. Galatino (1460-1540) or J.A. Wid-
@ Francois Icher, Sur le chemin des compagnons, manstetter (1506-1557) to E. Levita (1468-1549),
Ferriéres: Poliphile, 1984 # Mathurin Jousse, Le to whom he gave shelter for almost fifteen years at
secret d’architecture, La Fléche, 1642 Marc- his house in Rome. He constantly maintained a
Reymond Larose, Le plan secret d’Hiram: Fonde-
whole retinue of servants and amanuenses, both
ments opératifs et perspectives spéculatives du tableau
Jewish and converts, occupied with writing and de loge, Dieulefit: La Nef de Salomon, 1998 ¢
E. Martin Saint-Léon, Le compagnonnage, Paris: translating texts and treatises for him, kabbalistic
Armand Colin, 1901 # Jean-Michel Mathonieére, and otherwise.
“Remarques a propos du quatre de chiffre et du sym- Two among the main intellectual interests of
bolisme géométrique dans les marques de métiers”, in: Egidio’s life concern us most here: Christian kab-
idem, Etudes sur les marques au quatre de chiffre,
balah [> Jewish Influences III] and, secondarily,
Dieulefit: La Nef de Salomon, 1994 @ idem, Le ser-
Joachimism. In following these trends, he merely
pent compatissant, Dieulefit: La Nef de Salomon,
2002 @ Francois Rabelais, Oeuvres completes: Pan- reflected the atmosphere and spiritual proclivities
tagruel, Paris: N.R.F. La Pléiade, 1941, L. 5, chap. 36 of his time, which affected so many prominent
@ R. Recht, Le dessin d’architecture, Paris: Adam minds, like Galatino or > Guillaume Postel (15 10-
Biro, 1995 @ Franz Rziha, Studien iiber Steinmetz- 81), to name but two. That the General of Augus-
Zeichen, Vienna, 1883 (Leipzig: Zentral-Antiquariat tine Hermits should have been aware of the
der DDR, *1989; French trans. Etudes sur les marques
Joachimist expectations fermenting in certain cir-
de tailleurs de pierre, Paris/Dieulefit: G. Trédaniel/La
cles within his own Order was surely inevitable; Nef de Salomon, 1993) # Jean-Louis van Belle,
Quatuor Coronati: Les Saints Patrons des métiers de but there is little doubt that he condoned such spec-
la pierre, Braine-le-Chateau: Editions de la Taille ulations himself, even if in a milder measure than
d’Aulme, 2000 Raoul Vergez, Le pendule a some, as shown by his receiving the dedication of
Salomon, Paris: Julliard, 1957, 103. the Expositio abbatis Joachim in Apocalypsim
(1527) published in Venice by S. Meucci, in which
ROLAND BECHMANN the editor recalls meeting (in 1519) and being
encouraged by the Cardinal in person (a fact
Viterbo, Egidio da (Egidio Antonini), pointed out long ago by M. Reeves). An Augustine
*1469 Viterbo, ¢ 12.11.1532 Rome Hermit himself, $. Meucci directed in Venice, from
1516 to 1527, the publication of a whole range
Having entered the Order of Augustine Hermits of prophetic writings and biblical commentaries,
(1488), where he rapidly became the secretary of some spurious and some authentic, ascribed to the
Fra Mariano da Genazzano, Lorenzo de’ Medici’s abbot of Fiore. Furthermore, traces remain to our
favourite preacher and a well-known early oppo- day of this aspect of Egidio’s orientations, in the
nent of Girolamo Savonarola (1452-1498), Egidio form of manuscript copies of tracts of the samie per-
Antonini acquired the elements of a complete suasion still extant in his Nachlass.
humanistic education, including the study of several Despite our author’s strong personal commit-
oriental languages: aramaic, hebrew and arabic. ment to the perspectives of Christian kabbalah, it is
Gifted and hard-working, he achieved an enviable a noted fact —- and one difficult to explain, even con-
reputation as a poet, an orator and a remarkable sidering his demanding position — that almost
connoisseur of Greek literature and philosophy. never in his lifetime did he send anything to the
Honors came swiftly to crown such promising press, in this field as well as in others. Among the
beginnings: he was appointed successively a Papal translations he commissioned or did himself, ver-
Nuncio, the Prior General — and reformer — of his sions (mostly partial) survive of the books Babhir,
Order (1507-1518) and a Cardinal (1517), apart Raziel, Sefer Yetzirah, Temunah, Sha’are Orah and
from being singled out for delivering the inaugural Ginnat ‘Egoz by Rabbi J. Gikatilla, and excerpts
address to the 5th Lateran Council (1512). In > from the Zohar and many other documents of kab-
Reuchlin’s wake, he remained a staunch upholder balistic, midrashic or even talmudic origin. Among
of Jewish literature, and of its relevance for reform his original works, most conspicuous are the trea-
and a deeper understanding of Christian Scripture tises entitled Scechina and Libellus de litteris

--- Page 587 ---
1163
VITERBO
hebraicis, along with the earlier Historia viginti most part, denied the fame and influence they
seculorum. Unfinished, yet datable from 1530, the thoroughly deserved.
first of these texts (but the last one written by the
Cardinal) consists of a lengthy (ca 400 pages) expo- Egidio da Viterbo, Scechina e Libellus de litteris
sition of the mysteries of the Shekinah, that is of hebraicis (F. Secret ed.), Rome: Centro Internazionale
the divine Presence residing among men. Through di Studi Umanistici, 1959 (2 vol.).
Egidio’s agency, writing at Pope Clement VII’s Lit.: C. Astruc & J. Monfrin, “Livres latins et hébreux
request, the Shekinah supposedly reveals the du cardinal Gilles de Viterbe”, Bibliotheque d’Huma-
secrets of the kabbalah to the emperor Charles V, nisme et Renaissance 23 (1961), 551-554 Egidio da
via the mystical meanings of numbers |» Number Viterbo O.S.A. e il suo tempo, Rome: Analecta Augus-
Symbolism], (hebrew) letters and divine names. It tiniana, 1983 @ G. Ernst & S. Foa, “Egidio da Viterbo”,
in: Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani 42 (1993), 341-
is really an esoteric interpretation of the history of
353 #F Giacone & G. Bédouelle, “Une lettre de Gilles
the Church, understood in the light of God’s con-
de Viterbe (1469-1532) a Jacques Lefévre d’Etaples
tinued revelation, the complete grasp of which (ca. 1460-1536) au sujet de l’affaire Reuchlin”, Biblio-
has hitherto eluded Christians because of their théque d’Humanisme et Renaissance 26 (1974), 335-
ignorance of the kabbalah. Here, the Shekhinah 345 @ M. Idel, “Giles of Viterbo and the writings of
is assimilated with the Holy Spirit, which progres- Abraham Abulafia” [hebrew], Italia 2 (1980), 48-51
sively confers the plenary intelligence of the divine G. Javary, Recherches sur l'utilisation du theme de la
Sekina dans l'apologétique chrétienne du XV° au
mysteries to the prophets.
XVIII° siécles, Paris: H.Champion, 1978 @ EX. Mar-
New trials are about to manifest themselves for tin & J.E. Rotelle, O.S.A., Friar, Reformer and Renais-
mankind, soon to be followed by impending mes- sance Scholar: Life and Work of Giles of Viterbo,
sianic events which require cogent preparation. 1469-1532, Villanova, PA: Augustinian Press, 1992
Egidio thus attempts to present the emperor with J.B. Monfasani, “Hermes Trismegistus, Rome, and
illuminating developments based on the ten sefi- the Myth of Europa: An Unknown Text of Giles of
Viterbo”, Viator 22 (1991), 311-342 J.W. O’Malley,
rot — the last of which being the world of the
S.J., Giles of Viterbo on Church and Reform: A Study
Shekhinah proper — linked to ten different periods, in Renaissance Thought, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1968 @ D.J.
up to the pontificate of Leo X (Clement VII’s pred- Nodes, “Salvation by Abduction in Giles of Viterbo’s
ecessor) who, along with Charles V (these num- Commentary ad mentem Platonis”, Studi Umanistici
bers, as also III and VII, are of course considered Piceni 13 (1993), 189-196 idem, “Humanism in the
significant), inaugurates the incoming era of spir- Commentary ad mentem Platonis of Giles of Viterbo”,
itual fulfillment. Accordingly, the teachings of the Augustiniana 45 (1995), 285-298 @ idem, “Homeric
Allegory in Egidio of Viterbo’s Reflections on the
Shekhinah aim at elevating the emperor above
Human Soul”, Recherches de Théologie et de Philoso-
earthly matters and passions, beyond the celestial phie Médiévales 65 (1998), 320-332 @ idem, “The
spheres, to the contemplation of the divine realm, Ordering and Origin of the Soul’s Faculties According
in order to transform him — in obvious neoplatonic to Giles of Viterbo”, Augustiniana 49 (1999), 57-71 #
fashion, reminiscent of > Pico della Mirandola or idem, “Scholasticism and New Philology: Egidio da
+ Ficino, whom Egidio both met — into a faithful Viterbo (1469-1532) on Divine Generation”, Traditio
57 (2002), 317-340 @ EF Secret, “A-gidiana hebraica”,
minister, below, of the heavenly decrees above, in
Revue des Etudes juives 121 (1962), 409-416 @ idem,
other words to train him as a political and spiritual “Un éloge oublié d’Egidio da Viterbo par Antonio Tele-
reformer. sio”, Augustiniana 13 (1963), 511-514 @ idem, “Notes
The Libellus (1517), which the Scechina expands sur Egidio da Viterbo”, Augustiniana 15 (1965), 68-72
on, is a brief but remarkable tract dealing with the et 414-418; 16 (1966), 371-385; 18 (1968), 134-150;
symbolism of the shape of hebrew letters and based 27 (1977) 205-237; 29 (1979), 194-196 @ idem, Les
kabbalistes chrétiens de la Renaissance, Milano-Paris:
(as is well-known) on the kabbalistic Sefer ha
Arché, 1985*, 106-126 @ idem, “Néoplatonisme et kab-
Temunah. bale dans la Scechina d’Egidio da Viterbo”, in: P. Prini
As the elements outlined above clearly reveal, (ed.), I! Neoplatonismo nel Rinascimento, Rome: Isti-
Egidio’s works blend moderate messianic expecta- tuto della Enciclopedia italiana, 1993, 29-44 @ N. Séd,
tions (applied essentially to his own time) with a “La Shekhinta et ses amis ‘araméens’”, in: Mélanges
wealth of Jewish erudition, combined with exten- Antoine Guillaumont: Contribution a l'étude des
sive Greek learning. One might well wish that, by christianismes orientaux, Geneve: P. Cramer, 1988,
233-242 @ G. Séd-Rajna, “Un diagramme kabbalistique
remaining unpublished, the writings of this com-
de la bibliothéque de Gilles de Viterbe”, in: Hommage
plex figure — a high prelate, indefatigable preacher, a Georges Vajda, Louvain: Peeters, 1980, 365-376 @
religious reformer, major Humanist and Christian A.M. Voci, “Marsilio Ficino ed Egidio da Viterbo”,
kabbalist, once famous for his rare blending of elo- in: G.C. Garfagnini (ed.), Marsilio Ficino e il ritorno
quence, erudition and piety — had not been, for the di Platone, Florence: Olschki, 1988 (2 vols.), 477-508

--- Page 588 ---
VITERBO 1164
@ G. Weil, Elie Lévita: Humaniste et Massoreéte, Lei- established and he was accepted into more recher-
den: E.J. Brill, 1963. ché esoteric circles: in January 1891 he was admit-
ted to the > Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn.
JEAN-PIERRE BRACH His initial stay in the Order, however, was brief: he
demitted early in 1893, leaving in order to concen-
Waite, Arthur Edward, * 2.10.1857 trate on his writing. Waite also needed to earna liv-
Brooklyn, N.Y., | 19.5.1942 Bridge, ing — he was now married and had a small child to
Canterbury (England) support — and re-invented himself as a publisher.
Between 1893 and 1896 Waite edited and pub-
Writing as an apologist and critical historian of lished a series of English translations of classic
his subject matter, Waite was the author, editor alchemical texts, thus providing source material
or translator of more than eighty works on > for English-speaking students of alchemy for the
alchemy, > Freemasonry, kabbalah [> Jewish next hundred years. In addition Waite also edited
Influences], > magic, > mysticism, > Rosicrucian- The Unknown World, 1894-1895, the first journal
ism and other aspects of western esotericism. to be devoted solely to Western esotericism, but
Through a series of translations of > Eliphas Lévi’s while it was a critical success it was also a financial
major works on magic he effectively introduced failure and Waite left publishing to take up paid
Lévi to the English-speaking world, while the tarot employment as the commercial manager for Hor-
pack that he designed in 1909, in conjunction with licks, the manufacturers of malted milk. Freed
Pamela Colman Smith, has been more widely dis- from financial anxiety Waite was now able to
tributed than any other of the zoth century. He saw indulge his own taste in writing and to continue his
himself, however, not as a magician but as ‘the progress in esoteric Orders.
exponent in poetical and prose writings of sacra- In 1896 he published Transcendental Magic, his
mental religion and the higher mysticism, under- translation of Lévi’s Dogme et Rituel de Il’Haute
stood in its absolute separation from psychic and Magie, and in the same year he rejoined the Golden
occult phenomena’. Dawn, entering its Second Order, the Rosae
Waite’s parents — Emma Lovell, an English Rubeae et Aureae Crucis, three years later. At this
woman, and an American sea captain, Charles F. time Waite did not play a significant part in the
Waite - seem not to have been married and after the Order’s affairs, preferring to increase his initiatic
death of his father Waite was brought to England experience. In 1901 he was made a freemason and
in 1859 with his infant sister. Rejected by her fam- rapidly explored ~ Freemasonry’s many facets,
ily, Waite’s mother raised her children in the north- entering every masonic and quasi-masonic rite and
ern suburbs of London, and sought spiritual solace order that was open to him. When the Golden
by conversion to the Roman Catholic Church. Dawn broke apart in 1903 Waite did not stand
After the death of his sister in 1874 Waite suffered upon the sidelines: he seized control of the Isis-Ura-
a loss of faith and turned, successively, to > spiri- nia Temple, re-named the Order the Independent
tualism and Theosophy [> Theosophical Society] and Rectified Rite, and took his branch of the
in an attempt to restore it. He rejected both creeds Golden Dawn firmly away from magic and in the
and gradually developed his own brand of sacra- direction of an idiosyncratic Christian ~ mysti-
mental Christianity infused with such elements of cism. His Rite flourished for ten years, but in 1914
esotericism as proved acceptable to his tempera- Waite closed down the Isis-Urania Temple, partly
ment. His spiritual progress can be discerned in his for reasons of personal quarrels — which led also to
early poetry, but he also discovered the works of his withdrawing from the Societas Rosicruciana in
Eliphas Lévi, whose ambivalence to the Church of Anglia — but principally because of internal dissen-
Rome mirrored Waite’s own feelings, and in 1886 sion over Waite’s increasing emphasis on a mystical
he published an anthology of Lévi’s writings, The interpretation of the rituals.
Mysteries of Magic. This shift away from traditional esotericism is
This was soon followed by other editorial work apparent in Waite’s writing from 1900 onwards.
(Lives of Alchemystical Philosophers, and The He was drawn increasingly towards the idea of the
Magical Writings of Thomas Vaughan, both 1888), “Secret” or “Interior Church”; not an instituted
and by Waite’s own studies, The Real History of body but ‘the withdrawn spirit of the outward
the Rosicrucians, 1887, and The Occult Sciences, Holy assembly’, made up of ‘the integration of
1891. With these and other works Waite’s reputa- believers in the higher consciousness’. Coupled
tion as an objective but sympathetic critic was with this notion was Waite’s concept of “The Secret

--- Page 589 ---
1165 WEIGEL
Tradition”, which he developed from his interpre- In addition to the major works listed above, see: The
tation of the doctrine of the Fall, defining it as ‘the Pictorial Key to the Tarot, London, 1910 @ Collected
immemorial knowledge concerning man’s way of Poems, London, 1914 # A New Encyclopaedia of
return whence he came by a method of the inward Freemasonry, London, 1921 @ Lamps of Western Mys-
ticism, London, 1923 Hermetic Papers of A.E.
life’. This tradition, Waite argued, has been main-
Waite: The Unknown Writings of a Modern Mystic
tained down the ages in secret by means of ‘Insti- Wellingborough: (ed. R.A. Gilbert), 1987
tuted Mysteries and cryptic literature’.
For the world at large Waite propagated his doc- Lit: R.A. Gilbert, A.E. Waite: A Bibliography,
trines in a series of major works on significant Wellingborough, 1983 idem, A.E. Waite: Magician
themes within Western esoteric traditions. He began of Many Parts, Wellingborough, 1987.
with The Hidden Church of the Holy Graal, 1909,
in writing which he was aided by the essayist and ROBERT A. GILBERT
fantasy writer, Arthur Machen who was among
Waite’s closest friends and who provided him with Weigel, Valentin, * 1533 Grossenhain
a leaven of Christian orthodoxy. From the Grail [> (Saxony), + 12.6.1588 Zschopau
Grail Traditions] he progressed to Freemasonry (Saxony)
and the kabbalah, with The Secret Tradition in Free-
masonry, 1911, and The Secret Doctrine in Israel, Lutheran pastor and author of writings of a
1913, following these with The Way of Divine critical, theoretical, theological, and devotional
Union, 1915, an original and perceptive study of character. The son of commoner parents, Weigel
Christian mysticism. He completed the series with depended upon princely patronage to attend an
The Brotherhood ofthe Rosy Cross, 1924, and The elite Latin school and subsequently studied theol-
Secret Tradition in Alchemy, 1926. But for those he ogy at the Universities of Leipzig and Wittenberg,
saw as initiates he provided something else. possibly also teaching briefly at the latter. In 1567
In 1915, following the collapse of the Independ- Weigel was ordained as a pastor, a position he held
ent and Rectified Rite, Waite created a new Order, in the Saxon city of Zschopau from that year until
the Fellowship of the Rosy Cross, among whose his death. His was a career outwardly disturbed
members was Charles Williams — novelist of the only by the tensions and disputes of the Gnesio-
supernatural and unorthodox theologian. This Lutheran controversies between rival Lutheran theo-
Order was, like its parent Golden Dawn, initiatic logical factions. Chapter 23 of his Der giildene
and offered a series of progressive grades based on Griff (1578) recounts the seminal impact of these
a spiritual ascent of the kabbalistic Tree of Life. It disputes on his thought. In despair over the failure
differed from the earlier Order in that it was wholly to attain free concord and over the role of intoler-
and avowedly Christian, with neither magical nor ance and secular power in religion, Weigel turned
occultist practices, but utilising traditional esoteric to the inner word, following the path of Meister
symbolism as a means of presenting the spiritual Eckhart, Tauler, the Theologia Germanica, and
practices of Western Christianity. Sebastian Franck, whose writings he studied and
Throughout his later life Waite continued to incorporated into his own. Weigel’s thought is dis-
develop his ideas. After his wife’s death in 1924 he tinguished from theirs by his incorporation of ele-
married Mary Schofield who had been his disciple ments of nature speculation and > mysticism
and amanuensis for many years. With her support drawn from > Nicholas of Cusa and > Paracelsus,
he revised his studies of the kabbalah, the Holy as well as conventional cosmological sources of his
Grail, and esoteric Freemasonry, and completed his time. Though he published almost nothing during
memoirs, Shadows of Life and Thought, 1938. his life, he exchanged views and collaborated with
This was Waite’s last work and, fittingly — for Waite pastoral colleagues.
was, above all, a mystic — it incorporates a com- His earliest independent writings dating from
prehensive but succinct analysis of the ground of 1570 reveal an eclectic tendency that attains origi-
mystical experience. nality in his Guothi seauton (1571). Under suspi-
By contemporary standards of scholarship much cion of heterodoxy, Weigel penned a successful
of Waite’s critical work may be found wanting, but defense and turned to pastoral writing, composing
he was a pioneer of the academic study of esoteric sermons and a posthumously influential tract on
traditions, an innovative exponent of the philoso- prayer. The years that saw the preparation and
phy of mysticism, and a creative genius in the field enactment of the Lutheran Formula of Concord of
of practical spirituality. 1577 stimulated a renewal of his more critical and

--- Page 590 ---
WEIGEL I166
theoretical work, most notably Vom Ort der Welt Welling, Georg von, * Summer 1655
(On the Place of the World) of 1576 and Der Kassel, + 28.2.1727 Bockenheim
guldene Griff (The Golden Grasp) of 1578. Other
writings critical of the orthodox church establish- Before the publication of Petra Jungmayr’s dis-
ment and its officially enforced doctrines followed, sertation on von Welling in 1990, almost nothing
one of the finest of which is the Dialogus de Chris- was known about his life. He occasionally pre-
tianismo (1584). Authorship of the Weigelian works sented himself as Baron von Welling, but whether
is sometimes unclear due to his collaboration, the he was actually granted this title cannot be con-
lapse prior to posthumous publication, and his firmed. He served as captain in the army (1683-
adherents’ unfortunate habit of composing and 1685) and participated in the defense of Vienna
printing similar writings in his name. against the Turks. The following years he seems to
Since in Weigel’s thought the inner overshadows have spent as a riding master (Hofjunker). From
the outer, inner truth or spirit outweighs external 1705 until ca. 1710 he was an estate lessee (Pachter)
nature, ~ alchemy, or associated spirits or forces. in the mining district of Wenigerode. Then he
Cosmological interests, the contemplation of the moved to Berlin where King Frederick I made him
macrocosm, or a belief in the Paracelsian elemental councillor of legation (Legationsrat), a position
spirits serve to warrant the primacy of the inner or that he held only briefly. From 1717 to 1720, von
spiritual over the outer or material. Weigel’s contem- Welling was appointed director of the mines of the
plation of infinitude, reminiscent of Pascal’s, shows Duchy of Wurtemberg, then settled in Pforzheim.
that the path to ultimate truth and salvation lies There he entered the service of marquis Karl Wil-
within. Weigel’s thought is perhaps most forward helm at the Court of Karlsruhe in 1721, and until
looking in its idealist epistemology and its empha- 1723 served as director of the marquis’s private
sis on religious tolerance. chemical/alchemical laboratory. In 1722, von
Beginning in 1609 the posthumous publication Welling also worked for a short period in Anspach
influenced the Lutheran orthodoxy, the precursors as an expert in the salt mines of marquis Wilhelm
of > Pietism, especially Johann Arndt, and around Friedrich, himself also a person with alchemical
the time of the Thirty Years’ War, dissenters and interests. Von Welling spent his remaining years in
non-conformists during the 17th century. His name Bockenheim near Frankfurt. He was unable to find
was associated with radical dissent. Partially trans- a professional post there, and thus found himself in
lated into Dutch and English, Weigel became dire financial straits.
known to the Quakers. Scholarly interest in his Besides the work which made him famous (Opus
work was revived in the roth century. The com- mago-cabbalisticum et theosophicum, written in
plete works are only now being definitively edited. German), von Welling authored other texts. First,
in the Opus he mentions three (possibly short) pub-
Samtliche Schriften (ed. W.E. Peuckert/W. Zeller), lished pieces, but these have not yet been re-
Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1962- covered (see Jungmayr, 75). They apparently dealt
1978 (7 Installments); new edition (ed. Horst Pfefferl),
with St. John’s Revelation and with certain astro-
Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1996f.
logical calculations. Second, a few technical, un- (4 of 15 planned volumes have appeared) @ Transla-
tion: Valentin Weigel: Selected Spiritual Writings published pieces have survived, bearing on matters
(includes On the Place of the World and The Golden concerning von Welling’s profession as a mineralo-
Grasp), New York: Paulist Press, 2003. gist and/or his laboratory work at the Court of
Karlsruhe. Third, there are editorial comments given
Lit.: Horst Pfefferl, Die Uberlieferung der Schriften to the Curiose Erwegung (see further below).
Valentin Weigels (Condensed Diss.), Marburg, r991 The Opus seems to have remained von Welling’s
Steven Ozment, Mysticism and Dissent, New Haven: only true book. Originally intended to be only
Yale University Press, 1973 @ Siegfried Wollgast,
about the > alchemy of salt, it ended up covering
“Valentin Weigel und seine Stellung in der deutschen
much more. Published in 1719, and edited by “S.R.” Philosophie- und Geistesgeschichte”, in: Wollgast,
Vergessene und Verkannte, Berlin, 1993, 229-253 @ (see below), the author signed it as Gregorius
Andrew Weeks, Valentin Weigel (1533-1588): Luthe- Anglus Sallwigt. A note in it informs us that it was
ran Dissenter, Speculative Theorist and Advocate of finished as early as 1708. This first edition contains
Tolerance, Albany: State University of New York Press, only what was to be the first of the three parts of the
2000 @ Bernard Gorceix, La mystique de Valentin
subsequent versions. The second edition, published
Weigel (1533-1588) et les origines de la théosophie
in 1729 (after von Welling’s death and signed allemande, Lille: diss. published at the Université de
Lille III, Service de reproduction des théses, 1972. G.A.S), was the first to contain all three parts. Its
first part had been edited by S.R. in 1719. The third
ANDREW WEEKS edition (1735) was later re-edited in 1760 and

--- Page 591 ---
1167 WELLING
1784, and is considered the definitive and complete Boehme, von Welling does not deal with the theme
edition. It is signed Georg von Welling and edited of the Divine Sophia.
by C.S.; this stands for Christoph Schiitz, a theoso- Von Welling offers numerous theosophical inter
pher likewise interested in alchemy. Schiitz also pretations of biblical verses in the light of alchemi-
wrote the preface and inserted a text of his own cal concepts. For instance, salt, which is the main
on the “Eternal Wisdom”. All three versions bear term around which most of his speculations
slightly different titles (see Bibliography). The edi- revolve, corresponds to Christ; and the process
tor, “S.R.”, of the first edition, is in all likelihood of purification in alchemy is compared to that of
Samuel Richter, also known as > Sincerus Renatus. Lucifer on the Last Day. This is not a new line of
He seems to have gotten hold of the first edition interpretation, since for already over one hundred
without von Welling’s permission, since von Well- years, theoalchemy — theosophy blended with
ing writes in his preface of 1735: ‘the first part of alchemy — had offered speculations about salt. It
this work came to the light without our consent’. was variously and even simultaneously regarded as
As far as the third version (1735) is concerned, a substance, a metaphysical principle and a reli-
the words “mago-cab[b]alisticum”, found in the gious metaphor. Von Welling assigns to the three
titles of all three editions, are misleading. Nothing Paracelsian principles (salt, sulphur, mercury) a
is said in the book about either kabbalah [> Jewish role that is both celestial and terrestrial. In the
Influences] or + magic. For von Welling, these wake of > Knorr von Rosenroth, ~ Heinrich
words are just synonyms for knowledge of Nature Khunrath, > Franciscus Mercurius van Helmont et
and Christian faith, understood in the “gnostic” alii, he deals with the “Schamajim”, or the original
sense von Welling intends them to have. They serve balance between Fire and Water (in Hebrew
to designate his purpose of bringing together the “Aesch” and “Majim”, used here as a symbolic
“mysteria naturae” and the “mysteria scripturae”. oxymoron). Their separation is due to the Fall. It is
For him, Jewish Kabbalah employs ‘throughout a more specifically in terms of both cosmology and
misuse of the Divine Names’; but, the other hand, metallurgy that von Welling is much indebted to
he occasionally praises the Christian Kabbalists. EM. van Helmont’s Paradoxal Discourses, con-
Actually, the Opus is a book of > Christian theos- cerning the Macrocosm and Microcosm . . . (Lon-
ophy, and for all practical purposes, the terms don 1685; German ed. 1691). Both share the same
“kabbala” and “magic” are to be understood here complex vision of the four elements as related to
as synonyms of it. This explains the choice of the the planets, and similar cosmosophical views as
word “theosophicu[m]s”, which in the titles of well. The spirits of the four elements, or “elemen-
1721 and 1735 felicitously replaces the “theolog- tals”, are the object of a strong interest for von
icum” of 1719. The Opus contains graphic geo- Welling, who deals with them in connection with
metrical drawings that have something of a his exegesis of the creation of the world, and edited
“magical” flavor to them — not surprisingly, since a separate text on them (see Bibliography). The two
they are meant to convey theosophical notions. earlier relevant and important works on this mat-
Some of these drawings were later reproduced by ter had been Paracelsus’ Liber de nymphis, sylphis,
numerous other authors and added significantly to pygmaeis et salamandris (written in the 1530s),
the fame of the work. and Nicolas P.H. Montfaucon de Villars’ Le Comte
The three parts of the Opus correspond to > de Gabalis (1670).
Paracelsus’ “Tria prima”, namely salt, sulphur and Of the theosophical writings of the first half of
mercury. The central topics treated are the alchemy the century, along with the works of Sincerus Rena-
of salt, cosmogony, the Lucifer myth, an exegesis of tus and ~ Hermann Fictuld, the Opus ranks
Genesis, and chiliastic/eschatological speculations. among the more influential. Its reception reached
Many of the themes of Opus are also borrowed its height in the second half of the 18th century,
from — Jacob Boehme. First there is the during which two more editions appeared, in 1760
“Urgrund”, understood as the ontologically pri- and 1784. Among the patients to whom the physi-
mary reality in and of God, and His creation of the cian Johann Friedrich Metz recommended readings
seven Spirits. Furthermore, one finds Boehme’s exe- of these kinds was the young > Goethe. Metz urged
gesis of the first words of Genesis, the androgyny of Goethe to immerse himself in von Welling’s writ-
Adam, and the myth of the Fall of Lucifer who ings; and in his autobiography, Dichtung und
becomes Satan. Last, but not least, von Welling Wahrheit (1811, Book VIII), Goethe even devoted a
borrows from Boehme the belief in an “apokatas- few pages to the readings that he had made of theo-
tasis panton”: the belief that after the consumma- alchemical books, and in particular to his personal
tion of all things at the end of time, all beings, be exegesis of von Welling’s Lucifer narrative. In 1786
they good or evil, will return to God. But unlike Lorenz Schubert gave an extensive commentary

--- Page 592 ---
WELLING 1168
(Welling im Auszug mit Anmerkungen .. ., Frank- Welling, Opus mago-cabbalisticum et theosophicum:
furt/Leipzig) on the Opus. Darinnen der Ursprung Natur-eigenschafften und
Gebrauch Des Saltze, Schwefels und Mercurii, In drey
Within German > Freemasonry, some Systems
Theilen beschrieben. Und nebst sehr vielen sonder-
with Higher Grades, mainly the Order of the Gold-
baren Mathematischen Theosophi-schen Magischen
und Rosenkreutzer | Rosicrucianism II] and that und mystischen Materien, Auch die Erzeugung der
of the > Asiatic Brethren, made wide use of von Metallen und Mineralien aus dem Grunde der Natur
Welling’s book. The Gold- und Rosenkreuz’s ritu- erwiesen wird ..., Homburg von der Hohe: Joh.
als and “instructions” both borrowed heavily from Philipp Helwig, 1735; Two new ed. under that same
the Opus. Furthermore, a flurry of widely dissemi- title (and with the same content): Leipzig: Fleischer,
1760 and 1784. Reprint of this latter ed.: Stockholm:
nated publications by members of the Gold- und
G. Wendelholm, 1971.
Rosenkreuz or by authors close to the latter
referred to it as one of the supreme authorities (for Lit.: Antoine Faivre, “Les lectures théosophiques du
instance, AdaMah Booz [A.M. Birkholz], Die jeune Goethe d’aprés Poésie et Vérité”, in: Jean-Marie
sieben heiligen Saulen, 1783; Ketmia Vere [C.E. Valentin (ed.), Johann Wolfgang Goethe: L’un, l’Autre
von Jaager], Compass der Weisen, 1779; Der Sig- et le Tout, Paris: Klincksieck, 2000, 491-505 Karl
R.H. Frick, Die Erleuchteten: Gnostisch-theosophi-natstern, 1803; Annulus platonis, 1781). Johann
sche und alchemistisch-rosenkreuzerische Geheim-
Gottfried Jugel’s numerous books on chemistry
gesellschaften bis zum Ende des 18. Jahrhunderts, Graz
and alchemy, which began to appear as early as (Austria): Akademische Druck- und Verlagsanstalt,
1744, are also strongly inspired by the Opus. They 1973, 426-437 @ Petra Jungmayr, Georg von Welling
were widely read by the members of the Gold- und (1655-1727), Leben und Werk (Heidelberger Studien
Rosenkreuz, to which Jugel also seems to have zur Naturkunde der friihen Neuzeit, vol. 2), Stuttgart:
belonged. The Order of the Asiatic Brethren came Franz Steiner, 1990 @ Will-Erich Peuckert, Gabalia, ein
into existence in 1780-1781. Considering the many Versuch zur Geschichte der magia naturalis im 16. bis
18. Jahrhundert, Berlin: Erich Schmidt Verlag, 1967,
common characteristics shared with the former
504-527 Gershom Scholem, “Alchemie und Kab-
Order, it is hardly surprising that its founders bala: Ein Kapitel aus der Geschichte der Mystik”,
praised the Opus quite as much as those of the Monatsschrift fiir Geschichte und Wissenschaft des
Gold- und Rosenkreuz did. Both the Opus and > Judentums 69 (1925), 13-30, 95-110 @ Joachim Telle,
Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin’s Des erreurs et de la “Zum Opus mago-cabbalisticum et theosophicum von
vérité (1775) were part of the Asiatic Brethren’s Georg von Welling”, Euphorion 77 (1983), 359-379-
main referential corpus. During the same period
the Gold- und Rosenkreuz proper and its publica- ANTOINE FAIVRE
tions spread in Russia, notably within the esoteric
circle of > Nicolai Ivanovich Novikov. In that Westcott, William Wynn, * 17.12.1848
country no less than eight translations (made from Leamington, t 30.7.1925 Durban
1791 to ca. 1840, unpublished) of the Opus are
recorded. In the Habsburg Monarchy, as well, it One of the most prominent British occultists of
was recommended within the masonic Drasko- his time, Westcott wrote many essays on a wide
vitch System, which owned near Budapest a labo- range of esoteric topics such as arithmology [>
ratory for alchemical experiences. Number Symbolism] (Numbers: Their Occult
Powers and Mystic Virtues, 1890), > alchemy (The
Preface and Postcript to the anonymous Curiose Erwe- Science of Alchymy, 1893), > astrology (The Ori-
gung der Worte Moysis Gen. VI, 2, of which von gin and History of Astrology, 1902), Jewish Kab-
Welling was also the editor [Amsterdam? i.e. Korte balah [> Jewish Influences V] (Az Introduction to
in Altona?], 1699. New editions: 1700: Amsterdam the Study of the Kabbalah, 1910); and edited Eng-
[Korte in Altona?], 1701; Amsterdam [Korte in
lish versions of ancient and modern esoteric texts
Altona?], 1727. Possibly the author was either EM.
(such as the Sepher Yetzirah, 1887, or > Eliphas van Helmont, or Andreas Wolfgang von Runckel. Text
reproduced in von Welling’s Opus (1735), 473-485 Lévi’s Magical Ritual of the Sanctum Regnum,
without von Welling’s Preface nor Postscript # Grego- 1896). Particularly important and influential was
rius Anglus Sallwigt [= Georg von Welling], Opus his edition of the nine-volume series of Collectanea
mago-cabalisticum et theologicum: Vom Ursprung und Hermetica, including new English editions of
Erzeugung Des Saltzes, Dessen Natur und Eigenschafft
alchemical, hermetic, or kabbalistic texts, as well
.., Anton Heinscheidt (printer): Franckfurt am
as original contemporary essays (such as Florence
Mayn, 1719 #G.A.S. [= Georg von Welling], Tractatus
mago-cabbalistico-Chymicus et theosophicus: Von des Farr’s Egyptian Magic, 1896). Today he is best
Saltzes Uhrsprung und Erzeugung, Natur und Nutzen remembered for his fundamental role in the cre-
.. ., Saltzburg: [no ed.’s name] [?], 1729 # Georg von ation and early development of the - Hermetic

--- Page 593 ---
I169 WESTCOTT
Order of the Golden Dawn. He was an active and to a warrant granted by a Continental adept. It is
dedicated Freemason for most of his life (attaining, today safe to assume that the cipher manuscript
for example, the position of Master of the Quatuor had been produced in the 1870s or in the early
Coronati Lodge), as well as a member of the Soci- 1880s by another English occultists, Kenneth R.H.
etas Rosicruciana in Anglia (of which he became Mackenzie (1833-1886), and that the correspon-
the Supreme Magus in 1892) and of various fringe- dence with the supposed German adept Anna
masonic Orders (such as the Rite of Swedenborg Sprengel was fabricated by Westcott in order to
and the Sat B’hai). provide the Order with a convincing initiatic pedi-
Westcott was born in a family of surgeons and he gree. When Westcott, after Mackenzie’s death,
followed the same professional career, first at Mar- came into possession of the cipher manuscript, he
tock, Somerset, and then, after 1881, in London, appealed to Mathers in order to give a more elabo-
eventually becoming Coroner for North-East Lon- rate, definite shape to the rituals contained in it.
don. It is unclear when his interest in Western eso- The Order came actually to life in 1888, and was
teric traditions arose, but it must have been early in nominally led by a triumvirate composed of West-
his life, since as early as 1875 he was applying for cott, Mathers and William Robert Woodman
membership of the S.R.I.A., which he joined in (1828-1891), the latter being at the time Supreme
1880. This interest became so important to him Magus of the S.R.I.A. It has sometimes been
that he decided to spend a two year period of assumed that Mathers was the leading personality
retirement, between 1879 and 1881, studying in behind the early development of the Order, but it is
depth ‘the Kabbalah, the Hermetic writings, and now clear that Westcott contributed to it on an
the works of Alchymists and Rosicrucians’. In equal level with him, and that he was particularly
1882, soon after having moved to London, he instrumental in the creation of a consistent body of
became acquainted with > Samuel Liddell “Mac- teachings. In 1897, rumours about his involvement
Gregor” Mathers, also a recent member of the with the Order somehow reached his superiors in
S.R.I.A. and an enthusiastic occultist. It seems evi- office, putting his professional position at risk.
dent that neither of them, like many other English Consequently, in order to avoid difficulties, he had
occultists of the time, could content himself with to loosen his ties with the Order. He was never
what the Rosicrucian Society had to offer. The again to recover a prominent role in its affairs,
S.R.I.A. had in fact no practica! esoteric teaching to although for many years afterwards he continued,
deliver: it focused largely (albeit not exclusively) on as an outsider, to closely follow its activities. How-
erudite research rather than spiritual enlighten- ever, his moral authority among the members of the
ment. The > Theosophical Society, whose influ- Order was shaken in 1900 when, during the clash
ence was then rapidly spreading in Europe and between Mathers and the majority of the members
whose “secret doctrine” had much that appealed to of the Second Order in London (which led to the
them, could not provide a valid alternative, since it first and most important schism in the history of
seemed to lack the very practical dimension they the Order), Mathers stated that Westcott had never
were looking for, and was too Eastern-oriented for been in contact with any Continental adept and
their tastes. Some of their hopes were focused on had actually forged the correspondence with A.
the Hermetic Society [> Hermeticism and Her- Sprengel. Westcott decided not to take sides in the
metic Societies] of > Anna Kingsford and Edward controversy or to defend himself against Mathers’s
Maitland, founded in 1884 as a Western-oriented charges. In the following years he continued pursu-
counterpart to the Theosophical Society, but these ing his esoteric studies, contributing regularly to
were soon to be dis-appointed due to Kingsford’s the transactions (i.e., the official proceedings) of the
premature death in 1887. The possibility of creat- S.R.I.A. In 1910 he was again indirectly involved in
ing a new group which could add a practical a controversy concerning the Order, this time
dimension to the theoretical study of Western eso- between Mathers and > Aleister Crowley, over the
teric traditions first arose when, around 1886, publication of the Or-der rituals in the latter’s
Westcott came into possession of a cipher manu- occultist journal, The Equinox. By way of a third
script, containing the text of some rituals of initia- party, Mathers asked Westcott for financial help
tion and of lectures on various esoteric topics. This with the legal costs, and in return Westcott tried
was the first step towards the creation of the Her- to make Mathers retract his charges of forgery.
metic Order of the Golden Dawn. Over the last Mathers did not accept his terms and the two were
thirty years scholarly research has cast doubt on never to be in contact again. In 1918 Westcott
the official version of the history of the Order that retired from his profession and moved to Durban,
was taught to its members, which linked its origins South Africa, where he spent the rest of his life. He

--- Page 594 ---
WESTCOTT L170
continued to cultivate his studies and occult inter- into the world, being apprenticed at the age of four-
ests until his death in 1925. teen to a retailer of silk goods. By twenty-four he
Westcott’s writings have been widely read in had risen to be a manufacturer in his own right.
the circles of the early Theosophical Society, the Shortly before the masonic Convent of Wilhelms-
S.R.I.A., and the Golden Dawn, and were particu- bad (1782, see below), a notice described him as
larly instrumental in the definition of a Western ‘manufacturer of materials in silk and silver thread,
esoteric tradition as distinct from, albeit comple- and broker in silk goods’. He sold his business in
mentary to, the “secret doctrine” of the East as pre- 1782, still keeping a financial interest in the whole-
sented by ~ Madame Blavatsky. As is typical for sale haberdashery of his brother Antoine and
this generation of English occultists, Westcott pres- his brother-in-law Pierre Provensal, husband of
ents his works more as the result of erudite research his eldest sister Claudine. Willermoz devoted the
than as the fruit of mystical revelation or esoteric greater part of his long life to > Freemasonry, but
speculation. he also took part in urban life by placing his abili-
ties as organiser and administrator in the service of
William Wynn Westcott, Tabula Bembina sive Mensa religion and charity. He was successively or simul-
Isiaca: The Isiac Tablet of Cardinal Bembo - Its His- taneously the administrator of the Hotel-Dieu
tory and Occult Significance, Bath: R.H. Fryar, 1887
(notably during the Terror, in 1793), then of the
idem (ed.), Sepher Yetzirah: Translated from the
Hebrew by William Wynn Westcott, R.H. Fryar: Bath civic hospices of Lyon, a member of the parish
1887 @ idem, (ed.), Collectanea Hermetica, 9 vols., council of Saint Polycarpe, and Councillor General
London: Theosophical Publishing Society, 1893-1902; of the Department of the Rhéne. He was involved
The series has been reprinted in one volume with a note in primary education, and was also a keen farmer.
on Westcott and an introduction, both by R.A. Gilbert: It was nevertheless through his masonic work
William Wynn Westcott (ed.), Collectanea Hermetica,
that Willermoz has remained known to posterity.
York Beach: Samuel Weiser, 1998 @ idem, An Intro-
Initiated in 1750 at the age of twenty, in a lodge duction to the Study of the Kabalah, London: John M.
Watkins, 1910 @ R.A. Gilbert (ed.), The Magical whose name is unknown, he very quickly rose
Mason: Forgotten Hermetic Writings of William Wynn through all the ranks. Elected as Venerable Master
Westcott, Physician and Magus, Wellingborough: The of his lodge scarcely two years later, in 1752, he felt
Aquarian Press, 1983. the need to put order into a situation marked, as he
once wrote, ‘by abuses that were gaining ever-
Lit.: R.A. Gilbert, “William Wynn Westcott and the
increasing currency’ in Freemasonry. To this end,
Esoteric School of Masonic Research”, Ars Quatuor
Coronatorum 100 (1987-1988), 6-32 # idem, “Mss in he contributed to the formation, in 1760, of the
a Black Box: The Golden Dawn Papers of Dr William Grande Loge des Maitres Réguliers de Lyons,
Wynn Westcott”, Yeats Annual 6 (1988), 227-233 @ which was recognized in 1761 by the Grand Lodge
Idem, The Golden Dawn Scrapbook: The Rise and Fall of France. After having been President of this
of aMagical Order, York Beach: Samuel Weiser, 1997 G.L.M.R. in 1762-1763, he succeeded in becoming
(Engl. ed.: Revelations of the Golden Dawn, London:
its “Keeper of Seals and Archives”. He preferred
Quantum, 1997) @ Ellic Howe, “Fringe Masonry in
this type of function in practically all the bodies to England 1870-85”, Ars Quatuor Coronatorum 85
(1972-1973), 242-295 @ idem, The Magicians of the which he belonged. By taking advantage of the
Golden Dawn: A Documentary History of a Magical commercial correspondence that he maintained
Order 1887-1923, Wellingborough: The Aquarian throughout Europe, Willermoz could thus indulge
Press, 1985. one of his favorite activities: collecting, studying,
and comparing the rituals of all possible masonic
MARCO PASI degrees. He was a collector by nature; but he had
another motivation as well, which he revealed in a
Willermoz, Jean-Baptiste, * 10.7.1730 letter of November 1772 to Baron Karl von Hund,
Lyons, t 29.5.1824 Lyons the founder of the masonic system known as “Strict
Observance”: ‘Since my first admission to the
Willermoz stemmed from an old bourgeois Order, I have always been persuaded that it con-
family of Saint-Claude (the name was originally tained the knowledge of a goal that could and
written Vuillermoz) which, according to family would satisfy the honest man. Following this idea,
documents, was of distantly Spanish origin. His I have worked tirelessly to discover it. Studies pur-
father had settled in Lyon as a haberdashery mer- sued for over twenty years, a very extensive private
chant. The family included several priests, and correspondence with informed brethren in France
young Willermoz was educated by the Jesuits. The and abroad, and the deposit of the archives of the
eldest of twelve children, he was very soon sent out Order of Lyons, entrusted to my care, have fur-

--- Page 595 ---
LI7I WILLERMOZ
nished me with many means...’. That is why, in are Willermoz’s notes pertaining to the Coéns’ rit-
order to study all the “high degrees” of which he uals. By dispensation from the rule which he had
had obtained information, Willermoz formed dur- imposed on himself for other masonic systems,
ing these years what he called a “laboratory”, including his own — the Régime Ecossais Rectifié —
namely a Chapter reserved for a “small society”, he insisted on continuing to supervise the Temple
the Chapter of the “Chevaliers de l’Aigle noir”, de Lyon. In fact, he kept this temple active long
whose presidency he entrusted to his brother after the dissolution of the Ordre des Elus Coéns,
Pierre-Jacques. right up to the first troubles of the Revolution. Dur-
The object of this research concerned the ques- ing that time, Willermoz caused not the slightest
tion of knowing what the true goal of Freemasonry change in this Order. He left it completely outside
might be. The answer was revealed to Willermoz his great enterprise of the reform — or “rectifica-
when he was admitted in March 1767, by > Mar- tion,” as it was then called - of Freemasonry.
tines de Pasqually in person, to the latter’s Ordre Despite the differences of character between the
des Chevaliers Macons Elus Coéns de l’Univers [> two men, Willermoz always held Martines in great
Elus Coéns]. In a letter addressed in 1772 to a respect. As late as 1821, he wrote about him as
dignitary of the Strict Observance (Baron von ‘This extraordinary man, of whom I have never
Landsperg), Willermoz explained himself with dis- known the like’.
cretion, but clearly: ‘Certain fortunate circum- The fact is that Willermoz had subscribed from
stances brought me the opportunity, during my the start, and definitively, to the doctrine of “rein-
travels, of being admitted to a society, highly tegration”. He believed that this doctrine had been,
organized but small in membership, whose goal, and must always be, at the basis of what he consid-
revealed to me outside the ordinary rules, won me ered to be primitive and authentic masonry. If this
over. After that, all the other systems I knew (for I doctrine was lacking in one or another masonic
cannot judge those I do not know) seemed to me system, that was for Willermoz the sign that the
futile and unpalatable. This is the only one where I system was ‘futile or unpalatable’, or even ‘apoc-
have found that inner peace of soul, the most pre- ryphal’ (terms that he borrowed from Martines).
cious possession of humanity in relation to its be- Nonetheless, these convictions in no way pre-
ing and its principle’. In point of fact, Willermoz, vented Willermoz from pursuing his inquest into
once convinced of having discovered the truth of all the masonic systems that came to his attention.
Freemasonry, never departed from this conviction, He tirelessly solicited his numerous correspondents
and remained faithful to his initiator Martines, his (often princely ones, like Karl von Hessen-Kassel)
doctrine, and his Order. to “exchange illuminations” with them. Some
Shortly after Willermoz’s reception into the interpreters have seen in these investigations the
Order in 1767, Martines named him “Inspecteur symptom of an incessant and ever-unassuaged need
général de l’Orient de Lyon et Grand Maitre du for knowledge of the “truth”. But in fact, Willer-
Grand Temple de France”. In May 1768, the Sub- moz was convinced that he had already received
stitut Universel of the Ordre des Elus Coéns, Bacon this truth, which fully satisfied him. While he never
de la Chevalerie, ordained Willermoz to the highest stopped seeking its presence otherwise than in
degree of this Order, called Réau-Croix. Although Martines’ Order, it was purely with the goal of
the ordination had taken place with Martines’ gathering into one body all the “authentic”
authorization, Martines felt some doubt as to its masonic systems, that is, all the systems capable of
perfect regularity, and decided two years later to acting as vehicles for the doctrine he had made his
confirm it. This “confirmation” took place in May own. It was also in order to ‘reunite the branches
1780, by the “sympathetic way”, i.e., at a distance: grown from the same trunk’, to use his own words.
a method frequently used by the Elus Coéns in their This idea — the wish to unite all the masonic rites
operations, notably in those workings known as and systems — obsessed him for many years. He
“equinoctial”. Willermoz took very seriously the expounded it publicly in 1782 at the Convent of
functions that had been conferred on him. Meticu- Wilhelmsbad. One can detect its echoes in the
lous by nature, he was the most eager of Martines’ official title of the Lodges of the Régime Ecossais
disciples in pressing the master to give rituals, Rectifié, namely “Loges réunies et rectifiées de
instructions, and other documents that the Coéns France”.
needed for their work. In this regard, his corre- There is no other way to interpret his member-
spondence with + Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin, ship (and that of the two groups of which he was
after the latter had become Martines’ secretary, is the principal inspiration, at Strasbourg and Lyons)
extremely valuable to the historian. Of value, too, of the Strict Observance, also called “Maconnerie

--- Page 596 ---
WILLERMOZ gg
réformé ou rectifiée de Dresde”. This membership tery, which was none other than the Ordre des Elus
rested on a misunderstanding. When Baron Georg Coéns. Although situated as though at the very
A. von Weiler, an emissary of Karl von Hund heart of the Régime Rectifié, the Ordre Coén was
(founder of the Strict Observance) spoke of ‘re- of a another nature. In fact, on passing from the
establishing the Order in its first state’, he implied former to the latter, one entered something entirely
by that the re-establishment of the Order of the different. In the classes of the Régime Rectifié,
Temple, abolished in 1313. But Willermoz took Willermoz forbade anything that might pertain to
this expression to mean the return to the “primitive theurgical practices, as well as to kabbalah or >
masonry” whose foundations Martines taught. alchemy: domains that were the exclusive preserve
This is why Willermoz later wrote to Charles of of the Ordre Coén.
Hesse that he had been stupefied to find in the Strict On the other hand, what the Ordre Coén and the
Observance ‘nothing but a baseless and proofless Régime Rectifié had in common was the doctrine of
system’, and a ‘profound ignorance of the essential reintegration: the “science of man” (as > Joseph de
things’. The importance that Willermoz attached to Maistre called it). The function of Freemasonry
Martines’ doctrine is also attested to by his efforts was to teach this science, and to set it in motion on
after the latter’s departure for San Domingo to the initiatic plane. This is why both the Ordre Coén
organize at home, in Lyons, from January 1774 to and the Régime Ecossais Rectifiée rested basically
October 1776, “instructions” or “lessons” in on two doctrinal elements: on the one hand, the
which Saint-Martin, Du Roy d’Hauterive, and he belief in an original glorious state and an original
himself participated, sometimes as instructors, fall of man; on the other, the return of man and his
sometimes by taking minutes. “reintegration” into his primitive state, thanks to
Willermoz’s deep knowledge of the French and initiation. In order for this to be effective, it
European masonic panorama had soon persuaded required the intercession and the action of the
him that Martines’ system was really too different “Grand Réparateur” who is Christ.
from the masonry of that time to be lastingly If these are indeed the teachings of Martines,
implanted, and even less to supplant the other sys- there are also traces left by Willermoz’s readings of
tems. The Ordre des Elus Coéns was in fact a sort certain Fathers of the Church. Willermoz possessed
of crypto-masonry, or, as it was also called, a a solid religious culture; the masonic collection of
“masonry beyond masonry”. It was then that the Bibliotheque Municipale in Lyon has preserved
Willermoz had the idea of setting up his own sys- some of his reading notes, especially of the Greek
tem, so as to transmit both by teaching and by ini- Fathers (whom he certainly read in translation). It
tiation the “truth” as he believed it to the Régime was this very theme of the fall and reintegration
Ecossais Rectifié. The latter was officially consti- that the Fathers, from Irenaeus of Lyons onwards,
tuted on a national scale by the Convent des expounded in their interpretation of the biblical
Gaules, held in Lyons in November-December theme of “image and likeness” — man having been
1778, then internationally by the Convent of Wil- created in the image of God and after his likeness;
helmsbad in Germany, in August-September 1782. the fall having caused him to lose that likeness,
This “Régime” had a concentric structure, with whilst the divine imprint of the image remained
three successive circles: (1) The symbolic class or unaltered; thus it was a question of regaining this
Ordre maconnique with its four degrees of likeness. That, for Willermoz, was the very object
Apprenti, Compagnon, Maitre, and Maitre Ecos- of initiation.
sais. (z) The Inner Order, which was chivalric, with In addition, convinced that intelligence is a talent
its degrees, or rather stages, of Ecuyer Novice (a received from God which it is man’s duty to culti-
probationary period) and Chevalier Bienfaisant de vate, Willermoz added a pedagogical program to
la Cité Sainte. This two first circles constituted the initiatic process, writing a series of “instruc-
what Willermoz called the “ostensible classes” of tions”. These proceeded from one degree to an-
the Régime. They borrowed their essential outer other with the object of progressively clarifying
forms from the masonic and chivalric degrees that and completing this doctrine of reintegration in all
were current in France and Germany. (3) The its aspects: anthropological, cosmological, theo-
“secret class”, called the class of “Profession” and sophic. All the essentials of these instructions, and
of “Grande Profession”. This is where Willermoz’s their final achievement, are to be found in the
major innovation was to be found. These three cir- Instruction secréte des Grands Profés (Secret
cles or classes constituted the Régime Ecossais instructions of the Grands Profés), of which Willer-
Rectifié, properly so-called. But there was an addi- moz was the author, as well as in the “Lecons de
tional, fourth circle, protected under a veil of mys- Lyon” (Lessons of Lyons) which are partly of his

--- Page 597 ---
1173 WILLERMOZ
devising. The same pedagogical concern is found in Nationale Frangaise, Neuilly-sur-Seine) vol. 11, 2nd
the Préavis (Notice), a virtually programmatic series (1985), 57-106 # “Actes du Convent de Wil-
discourse delivered by Willermoz at the Convent helmsbad” (Jean-Francois Var, ed.), Les Cahiers Verts
of Wilhelmsbad on July 29, 1782, which was (Bulletin intérieur du Grand Prieuré des Gaules) 7
(1985), 27-52, 8 (1986), 20-99, 9 (1988), 11-58 @ Les
intended to present both the structure and the spirit
Legons de Lyon aux Elus Coéns, un cours de martin-
of the Régime Ecossais Rectifié. Two things should isme au X VIII° siecle par Louis-Claude de Saint-Mar-
be emphasized, however: first, that Willermoz tin, Jean-Jacques Du Roy d’Hauterive, Jean-Baptiste
always denied being the true “author” of these Willermoz (Robert Amadou, ed.), Paris: Dervy, 1999.
instructions, of which he was nevertheless the
writer; and second, that he believed the assurance Lit.: Robert Amadou, “Honnéte homme, parfait
macon, excellent martiniste, Jean-Baptiste Willermoz
of Martines when the latter also affirmed that he
(1730-1824)”, L’Initiation (Cahiers de documenta-
had done nothing but transmit a very ancient, tion ésotérique traditionnelle, Boulogne-Billancourt) 3
quasi-immemorial tradition. This means that for (1985), 100-110 @ idem, “Anthologie de Jean-Baptiste
Willermoz, as for Martines, this tradition (being Willermoz”, L’Initiation 4 (1985), 164-171 idem,
simultaneously a science of man, a science of rein- “Le Rite Ecossais Rectifié”, in: Martinisme (Docu-
tegration, and the initiation that accompanies ments martinistes 2), 2nd ed., Institut Eléazar: Les
them) derived from a unique “High and Holy Auberts 1993, 29-72 Gilbert Durand, “Maistre, le
mythe romantique et le Rite Ecossais Rectifié”, in:
Order”, as Willermoz called it, whose origin was as
Illuminisme et Franc-Maconnerie, Revue des Etudes
old as the world, and of which both the Ordre des Maistriennes 5-6, Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1980, 183-
Elus Coéns and the Régime Ecossais Rectifié were 203 @ Antoine Faivre, “Joseph de Maistre et lillumi-
temporal manifestations. Hence also came his nisme: rapports avec Willermoz”, in: idem, 125-132;
belief in a kind of pre-established harmony be- English trans. in: Maistre Studies, Lanham, Md., Lon-
tween this tradition and these institutions. don: University Press of America, 1988, 125-134
idem, “The Temple of Solomon in Eighteenth-Century
When he died in 1824 at the age of 94, Willermoz
Masonic Theosophy”, in: A. Faivre, Access to Western
may have felt that his work was dying with him, or
Esotericism, Albany: State University of New York
even that it had predeceased him. But it was noth- Press, 1994, 147-162 @ Ludwig Hammermayer, Der
ing of the sort. After various ups and downs, the Wilhelmsbader Freimaurer-Konvent von 1782, Heidel-
Régime Ecossais Rectifié with all its classes took on berg: Lambert Schneider, 1980 @ idem, “La Crise de la
new vigor, as did the Ordre des Elus Coéns. In the Franc-Maconnerie européenne et le Convent de Wil-
helmsbad (1782)” in: La Franc-Magonnerie, Revuecourse of the zoth century, it ended by occupying
Dix-huitieme siécle, vol. 19, Paris: Presses Universi-
an important place in a number of masonic obedi-
taires de France, 1987, 73-95 @ Alice Joly, Un mys-
ences. A fair and objective approach to Willermoz tique lyonnais [Willermoz] e¢ les secrets de la
and his work began to be adopted in 1973, when in Pranc-Magonnerie, 1730-1824, Macon: Protat, 1938;
his book L’Esotérisme au XVIII° siécle, Antoine reprinted Paris: Demeter, 1986 @ René Le Forestier, La
Faivre wrote: ‘One may say that he attained a high Franc-Maconnerie templiére et occultiste aux X VIII* et
spirituality and an uncommon breadth of vision. XIX° siécles (ed. A. Faivre), Paris: Aubier-Montaigne,
1970; reprinted Paris: La Table d’Emeraude, 1987,
Willermoz showed himself as gifted in meditation
Paris: Arché-Edidit, 2003 # Maharba [Robert Ama-
and inner illumination as in organization and dou], “A propos du R.E.R. et de la grande Profession”,
administration. The Revolution was nearly fatal to Le Symbolisme 391 (1969), 63-67 Pericle Maruzzi,
his work; but he is always considered one of the Notizie e documenti sui Liberi Muratori in Torino nel
greatest figures of masonic history’ (176). Since secolo XVIII, Torino, 1928, 1930; reprinted as La
these words were written, and thanks especially to Stretta Osservanza Templare e il Regime Scozzese
Rettificato in Italia nel secolo X VIL, Bologna: Atanor,
the many archival documents that have come to
1990 @ Ostabat [Jean Saunier], “Les Chevaliers Profés
light, the importance of this figure has become
de la Stricte Observance Templiére et du Régime Ecos-
more and more evident. sais Rectifié”, Le Symbolisme 389 (1969), 240-283 @
idem, “Les origines du Régime Rectifié”, Le Symbol-
Jean-Baptiste Willermoz, Les Sommeils (Emile Der- isme 385-386 (1968), 309-395 # Steel-Maret, Archives
menghem, ed., with a “Notice sur Jean-Baptiste secretes de la Franc-Maconnerie, Lyon 1893; reprinted
Willermoz et la Franc-Maconnerie au XVIII* siécle”), Geneva, Paris: Slatkine, 1985, ed. Robert Amadou,
Paris: La Connaissance, 1926 @ Les Conférences des with an introduction: “De l’Ordre, Présentation du
Elus Cohens de Lyon (1774-1776), aux sources du Régime Ecossais Rectifié” Gérard van Rijnberk,
Régime Ecossais Rectifié (A. Faivre, ed.), Braine-le- Episodes de la vie ésotérique, 1780-1824, Lyon:
Comte: Editions du Baucens, 1975 # “Actes du Con- Derain, 1948; reprinted Editions Plan de La Tour:
vent national des Gaules tenu a Lyon (1778)” (Edmond d’Aujourd’hui, 1980 @ Jean-Frangois Var, “LEssor
Mazet, ed.), in: Travaux de la Loge nationale de du Phénix, Jean-Baptiste Willermoz et la naissance
recherches Villard de Honnecourt (Grande Loge du Régime Ecossais Rectifié”, Travaux de la Loge

--- Page 598 ---
WILLERMOZ 1174
nationale de recherches Villard de Honnecourt 19, 2nd power. In this regard, the Old Testament prophets
series (1989), 165-228 @ idem, “L’Esotérisme chrétien can in no way be confused with diviners. William
et le Régime Ecossais Rectifié”, Travaux de la Loge admits the material influence of the stars, but
nationale de recherches Villard de Honnecourt 31, 2nd
denies that they can alter free will. He does not dis-
series (1995), 185-228 ® idem, Jean-Baptiste Willer-
count the possibility that the wizard Merlin was the moz, son ceuvre, Cahier Geoffroy de Saint-Omer hors
série, Grande Loge Réguliére de Belgique: Nivelles son of a demon. On the other hand, he rejects
1982 @ Auguste Viatte, Les sources occultes du popular superstitions: > magic, curses, phantoms,
Romantisme: Illuminisme, Théosophie (1770-1820), werewolves, abductions. All that is the work of
vol. 1, Le Préromantisme, Paris: Champion, 1927, illusionists who deceive the ignorant by resorting
139-151 (etc.), Paris: reprinted Champion, 1979 ¢@ to conjuring and sleight of hand. Nor does he
Paul Vulliaud, Les Rose-Croix lyonnais au XVIII°
believe in incubi and succubi, the expression of all-
siécle, Paris: Nourry, 1929.
too-human lust, as the work of demons. On the
other hand, how could one admit that the prince of
JEAN-FRANCOIS VAR
demons consents to obey men, as the necromancers
maintain, and lend himself to all the tricks attrib-
William of Auvergne, * t191 Aurillac, uted to him? Charlatans, however, do not dare to
+ 1249 Paris try this sort of phantasmagoria on “rational and
learned” minds. William himself was accused of
Born in Aurillac, William became a canon before practicing magic, but this is a misperception para-
1223, a master of theology in 1225, and bishop of doxically caused by his attacks against it.
Paris in 1228. He enjoyed the confidence of Louis
IX and also that of the popes, despite a certain Opera Omnia (B. Le Ferron, ed.), 2 vols., Paris-
“Gallicanism”. His pastoral activity concerned the Orléans, 1674 (repr. Frankfurt 1963) @ English trans-
development of religious orders, the reorganization lations: The Trinity or the First Principle (R. Teske,
ed.), Medieval Philosophical Texts in Translation 28,
of parishes and monasteries, and the defense of
Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1989 # The
Christian doctrine. Under his episcopate occurred Immortality of the Soul (R. Teske, ed.), Medieval
the university strike of 1229-1231, the conflict Philosophical Texts in Translation 30, Milwaukee:
between the chapter and the royal officers (1238), Marquette University Press, 1991.
and finally the “burning of the Talmud” (1240).
His responsibility as bishop led him to write Lit: P. Glorieux, Répertoire des maitres en théologie de
numerous exegetical, philosophical, and theologi- Paris au XIII° siécle, Paris, 1933, 315-320 @ P. Viard,
“Guillaume d’Auvergne”, Dictionnaire de Spiritua-
cal works. He showed himself a faithful follower of
lité, vol. 6, Paris: Beauchesne, 1967, cols. 1183-1184 @
+ Augustine, while also feeling the influence of S. Marrone, William of Auvergne and Robert Gros-
Aristotle and > Avicenna. His sources were very seteste: New Ideas of Truth in the Early Thirteenth
widespread: the Timaeus, Aristotle, the Church Century, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983
Fathers, the > Hermetic literature, Arab and Jew- David Porreca, “Hermes Trismegistus: William of
ish astrological books [> Astrology]. His theme Auvergne’s Mythical Authority”, Archives d’Histoire
was the exaltation of truth and the destruction of Doctrinale et Littéraire du Moyen Age, 2000, 143-
158 @ J. Longére, “Guillaume d’Auvergne”, in:
error. In the De universo creaturarum (On the uni-
G. Hasenohr & M. Zink (eds.), Dictionnaire des lettres
verse of creatures), one of the seven treatises mak- frangaises: Le moyen age, Paris: Fayard, 1992.
ing up the Magisterium divinale et sapientale
(Divine and sapiential magistery) written between
MICHEL LEMOINE
1228 and 1240, he treated at length the question
of demons, which gave him cause to denounce a
number of superstitions. These demons, he says, Witchcraft (15th-17th centuries)
already appeared to the Ancients under the guises
of Priapus and Venus, and their vanity had been Witchcraft is the human exercise of supernatural
fortified by the worship paid to them. They have powers for antisocial, evil purposes. The term also
power, but their faculties are degraded by the pas- refers to the whole of beliefs in the existence of
sions, especially envy. Nevertheless, God some- power by means of which someone can change
times allows them to afflict men, as we see from the nature or harm people. Over time, the idea of
examples of the plagues of Egypt and the sufferings witchcraft has started to include the idea of a dia-
of Job. William does not deny the existence of divi- bolical pact or at least an appeal to the intervention
nation [> Divinatory Arts], but he condemns it of the demons: supernatural aid is usually invoked
because it is an unseasonable imitation of divine to kill someone, to awaken the passion of love in

--- Page 599 ---
L175 WITCHCRAFT
others, to invoke the dead, to bring calamity upon that heretics were promiscuous and stood in some
enemies, and so on. These are some of the principal kind of relationship with Satan. The really intense
purposes that witchcraft has been made to serve in period of witch persecutions occurred in the period
nearly all periods of history. Witches are consid- from the r5th to the 17th centuries. The psycho-
ered to worship Satan and to be associated either logical basis for the persecution consisted in the
with the occult [> occult /occultism] and > magic belief that witches were trying to create an anti-
or with attempts to establish a kind of evil religion. Church led by Satan, with the witches’ Sabbath
According to traditional belief, the witches or as a ritual mockery of the Mass. The popular
wizards entered into a pact with Satan, cursed imagination pictured these witches as old, poor
Christ and the Church, observed “the witches’ sab- women, who lived as drop-outs in their village
bath”, and in return received preternatural powers communities.
to torment their chosen victims. A “familiar spirit” In Early Modern Europe fierce denunciation and
was sometimes at their disposal, able and willing to persecution of supposed witches characterized the
perform any service. The witch was not simply an cruel witch hunts, as is well known. In this context
innocent victim of the devil (as in the case of it is worth noting the role of confessions, which
demonic possession) but, rather, his willing instru- demonstrate how witchcraft beliefs consist of vari-
ment; witches could therefore be legally prosecuted ous folkloric elements. In earlier centuries only
because they had free will. The belief in witchcraft a few prosecutions took place, on an individual
and its practice seems to have existed among all basis; some suspected witches were tortured
primitive peoples: in the ancient world it played a according to Roman law, and many were subjected
conspicuous part, as existing records plainly show. to the ordeal of cold water (i.e., it was believed that
In the Holy Scriptures references to witchcraft are if they were guilty, they would float; if they were
frequent, and their strong condemnation of such innocent, they would sink. . .). In the early Mod-
practices is based upon a total rejection of magic as ern period, however, many persecutions occurred.
such (Deut. 18:11-12; Exod. 22:18). The debate on Many scholars have debated the origins of the
witchcraft and on its reality is ancient: the Canon witch hunt, but no agreement has been reached:
Episcopi, a 9th-century canon, was the first official among the various explanations that have been
document that expressed scepticism with respect to adduced are shifts in the interactions between high
the reality of witchcraft and the “Decretum” of and popular culture (1revor Roper 1969), the
Burchard (about 1020) evinced the same attitude. emeiyence of the modern state (Levack 1987), the
Witchcraft became a major religious concern, how- tradition break of the Reformation, the war of
ever, when the Inquisition started to treat charges the sexes (Keith Thomas 1977}, and conflicts among
of witchcraft (around 1230). In 1258, Alexander people and neighbours according to the functional-
IV tried to restrict the inquisitors’ powers to those ist approach (MacFarlane). Anthropologists, psy-
cases in which there was some clear presumption of chologists, historians, and so on, have attempted
heretical belief. Slowly the process of demonization to explain witchcraft according to their own
acquired specific elements, — such as the pact and approaches and methods. It is hard to say whether
the Sabbath -, in which stereotypes of persecution the witch-hunt is the outcome of a long-term trend
and folkloric traditions came to be mingled, and of marginalizing the poor and the drop-outs, or the
high culture met and permeated low culture. survival of ancient beliefs, or yet something else.
Basic to the witch persecutions of the t5th-17th Highly innovative were the studies of Carlo
centuries was the notion of maleficium, considered Ginzburg, who in his first book, I benandanti
punishable by law already in antiquity; but it was (1966) revealed the existence of a group of people
only over the course of a long and complex devel- who practiced fertility rites; in so doing he echoed,
opment that maleficium turned into witchcraft. to a certain extent, the discredited thesis of Mar-
Moreover, the idea of a formal pact between man garet Murray about an actually existing “witch
and the devil was developed gradually during the cult” in European culture. More recently, in Ecsta-
Middle Ages; and thus from an idea of magic that sies (1989), Ginzburg explored the cultural back-
could be correlated with natural philosophy with- grounds to the image of the Sabbath.
out any dangerous effect, we pass to a condemned The witch-hunt should be seen as a central event
notion of witchcraft which now encompassed all in the formation of early modern Europe, which
the magical arts, natural as well as demonic. The illuminates larger social and cultural issues. In this
demonization of heretics was the first step leading respect Muchembled (1987) has emphasized that
towards the witch hunts: after pope Gregory IX’s witch-hunting is fundamentally a political phenom-
bull Vox in Rama (1233), the idea started to spread enon and not a religious one; and Robert Mandrou,

--- Page 600 ---
WITCHCRAFT 1176
with his portrait of French magistrates (1968), has demonology, however: both shared the same evan-
analysed a traditional mentality highly influenced gelising aims and sources (Saint Augustine and
by the demonologists. Thomas, for instance), and therefore both were in
We can follow the evolution of demonological favour of persecuting witches.
thoughts through some of the most important trea- An important document was the Carolina
tises. During the Council of Basel in the mid-1 430s, (1532), an Empire law which decreed that sorcery
where some fundamental questions about papal should be treated as a criminal offence, and that if
and ecclesiastical power were discussed, Johann it had allegedly inflicted injury upon any person,
Nider wrote his Formicarius, a dialogue between a the witch was to be burnt. The first author who
theologian and a sceptic, in which he showed a attacked the identification of witchcraft as heresy
deep knowledge of the supposed phenomena of was the Franciscan Samuel de Cassini, who wrote
sorcery. One of the first authors to identify witch- against Savonarola, while Andreas Alciatus, in his
craft as heresy was the Inquisitor Jean Vineti, in his Parergon Juris (written around 1514, but pub-
Tractatus contra Demonum Invocatores (1450); lished in 1558) revealed himself as a sceptic who
still in the same century, Ulrich Molitor, wrote a thought that the witches’ delusions about the Sab-
Tractatus de Pythonicis Mulieribus (1489), in bath could be cured. The same opinion can be
which he argued against Archduke Sigismund of found in Pietro Pomponazzi’s De Naturalium
Austria that even though witchcraft may be illu- Effectuum Causis (written in 1520, but published
sion, it should be punished as if it were real. But in 1556), which was likewise leaning to scepticism;
the witch craze really began when Pope Innocent his views caused him some troubles, and he escaped
VIII, with his Bull Summis desiderantes affectibus punishment by arguing that as a philosopher he
(1484), appointed the Dominicans Jacob Sprenger was permitted to doubt, while as a Catholic he
and Heinrich Kramer as inquisitors to intensify truly believed everything the Church taught. The
witchcraft trials, with the use of torture. Two years lawyer Gianfrancesco Ponzinibio, in his Tractatus
later Sprenger and Kramer wrote their Malleus de Lamiis (1520) opposed the witchcraft delu-
Maleficarum. Using a thomistic concept of the sion and the conduct of trials by the Inquisition,
devil, they laid the basis for the witch craze and referring to the humanistic legal tradition. Another
defined the heresy of witchcraft in terms of a rigid lawyer, Gianfrancesco Pico della Mirandola,
code, which would set the pattern for 300 years. nephew of the more famous ~ Giovanni Pico,
The Malleus was influenced by Nicolaus Eymeric’s wrote his Strix, the first witchcraft treaty written in
Directorium Inquisitorum (1369) and made exten- Italian; and the famous > Agrippa of Nettesheim
sive use of ancient misogynist arguments. Kramer defended a woman supposed to be a witch. Com-
and Sprenger spread the belief that witches were monly regarded as the first systematic opponent of
members of a heretical sect, whose aim was the witchcraft trials, Johann Wier (1515-1588)
mankind’s damnation. The invention of printing believed that witch-hunts were reprehensible
meant that the Malleus could be widely reproduced attempts to punish crazy old women. In his work,
and exercise great influence. De praestigiis daemonum ac_ incantationibus
One of the first spokesperson against Luther, (1563), he tried to show that witches could not
Prierias, in his De Strigimagarum Daemonumque actually do anything, but that Satan deluded them.
Mirandis (1521) accepted the reality of witchcraft According to his biblical exegesis, he believed in the
and developed a theory about it, including a set of devil’s existence and activity; but he distinguished
rules for trials. Popular belief in the power of the between magicians, who are aware of the nature of
Devil as exercised by means of witchcraft and other their actions, and witches, who are not. The same
magic practices became more and more important, theme was repeated by the Lutheran Johann
but one must also take note of the attitude of the George Godelmann in his Tractatus de magis,
Reformers, Luther and Calvin, towards witchcraft. veneficis et lamiis (1591). He did not manage to
Luther, taking literally the Biblical command (Exo- stop the hunt, but he was the first one to express
dus 22), advocated the extermination of witches; doubts about its legitimacy and legality, on the
and Calvin was interested in fighting every kind basis of natural, theological, philosophical and
of superstition, witchcraft included. Nevertheless legal arguments. So after him, jurists had to con-
in the context of Protestant Demonology, the sider melancholy, for instance, as a malady con-
moral implications of witchcraft having been ducive to witchcraft. Jean Bodin (1530-1596), a
marked, doubts about the reality of witchcraf grad- French lawyer, wrote his De la Démonomanie des
ually gained prominence. There were no substan- sorciers, (1580) in response to Johann Wier’s De
tial differences between Catholic and Protestant Lamiis, a synthesis of his main work. Bodin wanted

--- Page 601 ---
NEIGH / WRONSKI
to develop and improve the witch-hunt, claiming as 1692 at Salem that the greatest American witch-
that witches should be put to death because, hunt started. The advent of the Enlightenment in
according to his political and demonological theo- the late 17th century contributed to an intellectual
ries, they were disloyal to the monarchy and to climate that favoured naturalistic explanations
God. Putting emphasis on the idea of witchcraft as such as mental illness; and in the wake of the Sci-
a crimen exceptum, Bodin focuses his attention on entific Revolution, the belief in witchcraft gradu-
the fact that witches are aware of their relationship ally lost its appeal.
with Satan, thus rejecting the theory of Wier, whom
he accused of being a sorcerer. Sydney Anglo (ed.), The Damned Art: Essays in
Another opponent of witch-hunt was Reginald the Literature of Witchcraft, London, 1977 # Bengt
Ankarloo & Gustav Henningsen (eds.), Early Modern
Scot, who in his Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584)
European Witchcraft: Centres and Peripheries, Ox-
denied the reality of witchcraft. James VI Stuart, ford: Clarendon, 1989 @ Bengt Ankarloo & Stuart
king of Scotland and later king of England, Clark (eds.), History of Witchcraft and Magic in
answered him with his Daemonologie which Europe, 6 vols., London: Athlone Press, r999- @ D.R.
allowed local courts to examine witches; other Bauer & Sénke Lorenz (eds.), Das Ende der Hexenver-
responses to Scot included the Catholic Bishop folgungen, Stuttgart: FE. Steiner, 1995 Stuart Clark,
Thinking With Demons: The Idea of Witchcraft inBinsfeld, De confessionibus (1589) and Disquisi-
Early Modern Europe, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997
tiones Magicae (1603) by the Jesuit Martin Delrio,
@ Carlo Ginzburg, The Night Battles: Witchcraft and
who wished to mitigate the severity of the witch tri- Agrarian Cults in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Cen-
als and denounced the excessive use of torture. turies (Italian orig. 1966), Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
With respect to the 16th century, most of the tri- University Press, 1983 idem, Ecstasies: Deciphering
als at which witches were condemned and burned the Witches’ Sabbath (Italian orig. 1989), New York:
by lay tribunals suggest that in the Mediterranean Pantheon, r991 @ Hartmut Lehmann & Otto Ulbricht
(eds.), Vom Unfug des Hexen-Processes: Gegner der
countries, such as Spain, Portugal and Italy, the
Hexenverfolgung von Johann Weyer bis Friedrich Spee
witch craze did not reach the level of violence and (Wolfenbiitteler Forschungen 55), Wiesbaden, 1992
fierceness found in northern Europe. This interpre- Brian P. Levack, The Witch-Hunt in Early Modern
tation is confirmed by an Inquisitorial Instruction Europe, London: Longman, 1987 Alan MacFarlane,
discovered by John Tedeschi; written by Deodato Witchcraft in Tudor and Stuart England, New York:
Scaglia in 1657, it provides new procedural safe- Harper and Row, 1970 @ Robert Mandrou, Magistrats
et sorciers en France au XVII® siécle: Une analyse de
guards. In his interesting contribution to witchcraft
psychologie historique, Paris: Plon, 1968 # H.C.
studies, Tedeschi has used this document to show Midelfort, Witch Hunting in South-western Germany,
how the Roman Inquisition adopted legal safe- 1562-1684: The Social and Intellectual Founda-
guards and proper procedures with respect to tions, Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1972 @
witch trials, and how it became inclined to scepti- E. William Monter, Witchcraft in France and Switzer-
cism in regard to witchcraft. land: The Borderlands during the Reformation, Ithaca,
The German Jesuit Friedrich von Spee disap- N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1976 # Keith Thomas,
Religion and the Decline of Magic, New York: Scrib-
proved of credulity with respect to witches in his
ner, 1971 @ John Tedeschi, The Prosecution of Heresy:
Cautio Criminalis (1631), a real and violent j’ac- Collected Studies on the Inquisition in Early Modern
cuse against the methods used by inquisitors and Italy, Binghamton NY: Medieval and Renaissaice
lawyers in the witch trials, stressing the unreliabil- Texts and Studies 1991 @ Michaela Valente, Johann
ity of accusations and confessions extracted under Wier: Agli albori della critica razionale dell’occulto e
torture. He rejected the death penalty as cruel and del demoniaco nell’Europa del Cinquecento, Florence:
Leo S. Olschki, 2003.
too severe for those mad women, and began a
stream of criticisms directed at the juridical feature
of the witch-hunt. But the great change came with MICHAELA VALENTE
Balthasar Bekker and his De betoverde weereld
(1691): applying the new Cartesian approach to Wronski, Jozef Maria Hoéne-,
witchcraft, he argued against this belief and the * 23.8.1776 Wolsztyn (near Posnan,
practice of persecution, denying the existence of Poland), + 8.8.1853 Neuilly (France)
the Devil, so that he was himself accused of
Atheism. But the seeds of his thought began to The mathematician-philosopher-messianist Wronski
blossom. was the son of an architect who came to Poland
During the 17th and 18th centuries, the witch from Bohemia and a Polish mother. He partici-
trials gradually came to an end in Europe; it is pated in the Kosciuszko uprising in 1794, then
important, however, to remember that it was as late joined the Russian army, from which he retired in

--- Page 602 ---
WRONSKI 1178
1797 in order to study philosophy in Germany. In great ages. The first age (itself subdivided into four
1800 he went to France to recommence his military periods) was that of direct rule by providence in
career with a Polish unit, but soon gave himself which humanity did not know its destiny. Human
over to the philosophical and scientific studies that aims in this period, which lasted from the ancient
would last the rest of his life, first in Marseille and East to the Enlightenment, were relative: succes-
then in Paris. In August 1803, he experienced a sively striving for physical well-being, justice, holi-
flash of illumination which changed the course of ness, and knowledge. The second age is an era of
his thought. Having discovered the Absolute and transition; providence has ceased to act directly,
grasped the mystery of the beginning and end, he but humanity has not yet grasped its destiny and is
henceforth devoted himself to the development of therefore ignorant of the correct course of action.
his Absolute philosophy as the vehicle for the uni- We are now well advanced in the second age; the
versal regeneration of humanity (which is why he intellectual confusion of the age of transition has
called it a “Messianism”). produced the contemporary state of “social antin-
Wronski’s Absolute philosophy begins, as do the omy” characterized by individualism and revolu-
contemporary German Idealist philosophies, with tion. This crisis is manifested in the political realm
Kant’s Copernican revolution in philosophy while by the struggle between the Right — the party of
rejecting Kant’s identification of the a priori forms feeling, of the Good, of revelation and divine right
of knowledge with the subjective forms of the —and the Left — the party of cognition, of the True,
human mind. The a priori principles, he asserts, are of empiricism and liberty. Wronski’s Messianism
objective, because the laws of reason are identical resolves the antinomies and inaugurates the third
with the laws of the universe. An a priori knowl- age by demonstrating that true liberty can only be
edge of the noumenal reality is therefore possible. achieved by bringing human reason into accord
Wronski acknowledges that his system originated with the divine laws. Correspondingly, the third
in a flash of intuition, in an act of illumination, but age, the Age of Absolute, will be theocratic but not
insists on the necessity of a total rationalization of repressive. It will be an era of harmony in which
knowledge and identifies the Absolute with cre- human reason reconciles itself with the divine laws,
ative reason. This claim depends on his distinction liberates itself from the conditions of physical exis-
between the “chrematic” reason (from the Greek tence, and returns to the Absolute. Wronski’s is a
word chrema, “thing”) and the “achrematic” rea- metaphysical philosophy of history: history is a
son. The former is limited to the phenomenal realm progressive return to God through the reorienta-
of finite things; the latter attains to the Infinite. tion of human will and knowledge.
Despite its intuitive nature, Wronski insists that the In the sphere of religion, Wronski’s discovery of
achrematic reason is a rational faculty, having the Absolute inaugurates a great reform in which
nothing to do with > mysticism (which in his usage Christianity, a religion based, like all revealed reli-
includes contemporary Illuminisms). The active, gions, on sentiment of the Absolute, is to be suc-
creative spontaneity of reason, as he sees it, is the ceeded and completed by scientific religion, or
opposite of mysticism, which is a passive, thought- “séhélianism” (from a Hebrew word meaning
less striving for an irrational union with the “reason” ). The new religion, a rationalized synthe-
Absolute (Wronski claimed to be persecuted by sis of existing world religions, will be founded on
gangs of Illuminists, whose infernal goal was to knowledge and rational demonstration. Séhélian-
hinder present-day humanity from attaining its ism is reminiscent of Deist natural religion, but
destiny). Since the Absolute, or Being itself, is with Wronski’s Absolute philosophy substituting
rational, there is no heterogeneity between Being for Enlightenment rationalism.
and knowledge, and Absolute Knowledge is capa- Wronski was a notoriously prickly individual
ble of systematization and expressible in mathe- who claimed absolute originality for his thought.
matical formulae. Wronski was one of the pioneers Nevertheless, he unquestionably absorbed in-
of the idea, very much in the air in the Romantic fluences, and read Fichte and > Schelling carefully.
period, of a new Encyclopedia that would be syn- Wronski considered Schelling’s philosophy the
thetic where Diderot’s had been analytic. He pro- highest achievement of German Idealism, but not
posed an organic system of sciences, deduced from even Schelling had raised himself to the “achremic”
one principle, governed by one universal law, and reason and therefore had not been able to penetrate
integrating different branches of science in an the inner essence of the Absolute. Nevertheless,
“absolute system of the world”. Wronski’s Absolute philosophy is an alternative
Wronski’s philosophy of history, which he began all-embracing system to those of the German
to work out around 1814, divides history into three Idealists. Wronski’s philosophy of history is also

--- Page 603 ---
1179 YEATS
comparable to Idealist philosophies of history, which formed the foundation of his literary work
although its concern for contemporary social and in the domains of poetry, drama, fiction, the essay,
political events indicates the further influence of and memoir. In the essay “If I Were Four-and-
French thought, particularly that of > Pierre- Twenty”, the 54-year old Yeats reflected that his
Simon Ballanche. Wronski was more familiar with youthful impulse to ‘hammer [his] thoughts into
theosophy than he cared to admit. He read the kab- unity’ resulted in a fusion of his three primary inter-
balists [> Jewish Influences] and > Boehme and his ests: ‘a form ofliterature, a form of philosophy, and
disciples, who influenced him as much as Fichte a belief in nationality’. Most significant to Yeats’s
and Schelling. While Wronski is to be distinguished reputation as a student of esoteric thought is his
from his theosophical predecessors inasmuch as treatise A Vision (1925, revised 1937), a volume
religion has become the object of knowledge, his synthesizing a lifetime of research, experimenta-
Absolute philosophy is an early-r9th-century ver- tion, and meditation. Yeats’s theories resulted from
sion of a phenomenon that appears at various times a combination of personal studies, collaborative
in the history of Western esotericism: the presenta- efforts with close associates (most especially his
tion of abstract universalist structures as keys of wife, George Hyde-Lees, 1891-1968) and his par-
unification of all fields of knowledge (e.g. > ticipation in several esoteric societies.
Ramon Llull). Wronski’s Absolute philosophy is a In 1885, Yeats chaired the first meeting of the
synthesis of post-Kantian Idealism and Illuminist Dublin Hermetic Society [> Hermeticism and Her-
reintegration [> Illuminism]. metic Societies] (which would change its name a
While Wronski had a series of disciples in his life- year later, becoming the Dublin Lodge of the >
time (P.J. Arson, E. Thayer, C. Durutte), all of Theosophical Society). At this time his main aspi-
whom assisted hin financially, his principal ration, under the influence of his father John Butler
influence was on Polish poets and philosophers in Yeats (1839-1922), was to become a painter. Yeats
the 1840s: A. Mickiewicz, Z. Krasinski, B.F. Tren- attended Dublin’s Metropolitan School of Art,
towski, and K. Libelt. where he met the mystic poet and artist George
Russell (1867-1935), who dubbed himself > AE.
Introduction a la Philosophie des Mathématiques et In 1887, the Yeats family moved to London, where
Technique de l’Algorithme, Paris: Didot, 1811 @
the young poet met ~ Madame Blavatsky, and
Philosophie de I’Infini, Paris, 18t4 @ Prodrome du
joined the Theosophical Society. In his Autobiogra-
Messianisme, Révélation des destinées de ’humanité,
Paris: Doyen, 1831 Messianisme, Paris, 2 vols. 183 1- phy, Yeats records his admiration for Blavatsky’s
1839, 3 vols. 1847-1848. genius and powerful presence, balanced by the
constant suggestion of potentiai traud. True to his
Lit.: Philippe d’Arcy, Hoene-Wronski: Une philoso- individualism, his main objection to the Theosoph-
phie de la création, Paris: Seghers, 1970 # W.M. ical Society was its tendency to breed dogmatism in
Kozlowski, Les Idées Francaises dans la Philosophie
its adherents. In 1889 Yeats was asked to leave the
Nationale et la Poésie patriotique de la Pologne,
Society, as he insisted, against Blavatsky’s wishes,
Grenoble: Aubert, 1923, 5-69 @ Auguste Viatte, Les
Sources occultes du romantisme, vol. 2, Paris: Cham- on conducting occult experiments. The purpose of
pion, 1928 (repr. 1979), 253-260 @ Andrzej Walicki, the experiments was to verify the truth of the theo-
Philosophy and Romantic Nationalism: The Case of sophicai knowledge, and to counterbalance the
Poland, Oxford: Clarendon, 1982, 107-121. danger of a one-sided emphasis on the abstract
intellect. Concurrently, he met > Samuel Liddell
ARTHUR MCCALLA Macgregor Mathers (1854-1918), author of The
Kabbala Unveiled and one of the founders of the >
Yeats, William Butler, * 13.6.1865 Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. Mathers
Sandymount (Ireland), + 28.1.1939 tutored Yeats in his symbolic system, encouraged
Roquebrune (France) experimentation with the inducement of visions,
and initiated him into ritual > magic. Yeats joined
Modern Irish poet noted for his eclectic theories the Golden Dawn in 1890, but subsequently dis-
on the human personality, spiritual development, tanced himself from the powerful influence of
human history, and cosmology. Though known Mathers. Echoes of Golden Dawn thought and rit-
chiefly as one of the primary architects of the Irish ual, and of Yeats’s complicated attitude toward
Renaissance and as a tireless proponent for Irish Mathers, may be found in the 1896 short fiction
independence, Yeats’s posthumous appeal to a “Rosa Alchemica”. One of the principal charac-
global readership concerns the poet’s interactions ters, a charismatic leader of an occult society,
with Western and Eastern esoteric traditions, Michael Robartes, is modeled on Mathers. In 1901,

--- Page 604 ---
YEATS 1180
after Mathers’ expulsion as leader of the Golden ideas on the connections between the human mind,
Dawn, Yeats played a pivotal role in maintaining memory, and history, such as he had presented ear-
stability within the Order. Of great importance in lier in the essay “Magic” (1901): ‘I came to believe
this respect is his speech entitled “Is the Order of in a Great Memory passing on from generation to
Ro Rs Sé.AniCy to Remain aeMagical Ordere” generation. But that was not enough, for these
(reprinted in Harper 1974), which argues for the images showed intention and choice . . . If no mind
maintenance of Unity within the society. In his was there [i.e.,.a greater mind], why should I sud-
opinion the ranking of adepti, and the passage denly come upon salt and antimony, upon the liq-
from one degree of attainment to the next, reflected uefaction of the gold, as they were understood by
the very structure of the macrocosm: “The passing the alchemists? This study had created a contact or
by their means [the grades of initiation] from one mingling with minds who had followed a like study
Degree to another is an evocation of the Supreme in some other age, and that these minds still saw
Life, a treading of a symbolic path... a climbing and thought and chose. Our daily thought was cer-
towards the light which it is the essence of our sys- tainly but the line of foam at the shallow edge of a
tem to believe, flows continually from the lowest of vast luminous sea’.
the invisible degrees to the highest’. After seven years of working with automatic
In 1893 Yeats edited, with Edwin Ellis, The writing, Yeats produced A Vision, which outlines
Works of William Blake. This edition reveals the soul’s circular journey through the 28 phases of
Yeats’s wide-ranging familiarity with Western eso- the moon, coming to completion in Unity of Being.
tericism, including ~ Cornelius Agrippa, > Para- Through a geometrical representation of two inter-
celsus, > Swedenborg, and a number of hermetic locking spirals — or gyres — Yeats maps out the his-
[> Hermetic Literature], Neoplatonic [> Neopla- tory of civilization, and further suggests the fate of
tonism], and Rosicrucian [> Rosicrucianism] writ- the soul after it leaves the body. In the chapter
ers. The project provides early evidence of Yeats’s “Dove or Swan” Yeats uses the same paradigm to
agenda of carving a place for himself in a tradition discuss the evolution of art in the East and West,
of the “poet-philosopher”. suggesting that Byzantine art represents a climax in
Another close association that had rich reso- that history, a Unity of Culture. In one form or
nance in Yeats’s spiritual, literary and political another, this framework of interlocking spirals is at
activities was his long-standing friend and lover the base of all of Yeats’s writings, poetic or dra-
Maud Gonne (1865-1953). The two met in 1889, matic, from 1920 to his death in 1939. Given his
and maintained close acquaintance through their tremendous labors to elucidate what he called ‘the
mutual concern with Ireland’s political future, and spiritual intellect’, it may seem ironic that Yeats
Yeats and Maud declared their love for each other wrote in the last month of his life that ‘Man can
in a “spiritual marriage” in 1897. Yeats’s idea of embody truth but he cannot know it’.
spiritual marriage as an alliance between mystic
soror and fratre was modeled upon the legendary A Vision, London: Macmillan, 1937. The Autobiogra-
phy of William Butler Yeats, New York: Macmillan,alchemist Nicolas Flamel and his wife Pernelle.
1938 @ Mythologies, New York: Macmillan, 1959 @
Again in 1908-1909, the two re-experienced their
Essays and Introductions, New York: Macmillan,
mystical bond, as may be noted in their letters as 1961 # Memoirs, Denis Donoghue (ed.), New York:
well as in Yeats’s Memoirs (1972). Their spiritual Macmillan, 1972 @ The Collected Poems of W.B.
partnership would never take the form of a legal Yeats (Richard Finneran, ed.), New York: Macmillan,
marriage. 1989 @ The Gonne-Yeats Letters, 1893-1938, Syra-
In 1917 Yeats married George Hyde-Lees, a 26 cuse: Syracuse University Press, 1992.
year old woman who was also a Golden Dawn
Lit.: Hazard Adams, Blake and Yeats: The Contrary
member. Four days after they were married,
Vision, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1955 @
George attempted automatic writing and was able
Richard Ellmann, Yeats: The Man and the Masks, New
to transmit a text attributed to “Instructors” in the York: Norton, 1979 @ R.E. Foster, W.B. Yeats: A Life,
spirit world. To Yeats’s questions about the pur- vol. I: The Apprentice Mage, 1865-1914, Oxford, New
pose of their instruction, they announced ‘we have York: Oxford University Press, 1997 idem, W.B.
come to give you metaphors for poetry’. The first Yeats: A Life, vol. Il: The Arch-Poet, 1915-1939,
fruit of this are evident in the poems “The Phases of Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press, 2003
William Gorski, Yeats and Alchemy, Albany: State
the Moon”, “Ego Dominus Tuus”, and “The Dou-
University of New York Press, 1996 @ George Miils
ble Vision of Michael Robartes”, as well as an Harper, Yeats’s Golden Dawn, London: Macmillan,
extended prose meditation “Per Amica Silentia 1974 # George Mills Harper (ed.), Yeats’s “Vision”
Lunae” (1918). In the latter Yeats rearticulated his Papers, London: Macmillan, 1992 ¢ idem, The Mak-

--- Page 605 ---
T181 ZIEGLER
ing of Yeats’s “A Vision”, London: Macmillan, 1986 @ main works were published during the period from
Graham Hough, The Mystery Religion of W. B. Yeats, 1920 to his death, beginning with Gestaltwandel
Brighton: Harvester, 1984 # James Olney, The Rhi-
der Gotter (Transformation of the Gods, 1920),
zome and the Flower: The Perennial Philosophy -
and including Zwischen Mensch und Wirtschaft Yeats and Jung, Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1980 @ Kathleen Raine, Yeats, the Tarot, and the (Between Man and Economy, 1927). But Ziegler’s
Golden Dawn, Dublin: Dolmen Press, 1972 @ idem, most important works were to come later, and
Yeats the Initiate, London: Allen & Unwin, 1986 @ include Uberlieferung (Transmission, 1936) and
Ann Saddlemyer, Becoming George: The Life of Mrs. Menschwerdung (Becoming Human, 1948), as
W.B. Yeats, Oxford, New York: Oxford University well as a selection of his writings entitled Spatlese
Press, 2002 @ Ravindra Sankaran, W.B. Yeats and
eigener Hand (1953). Ziegler won a number of
Indian Tradition, Delhi: Konark, 1990 # Thomas
prestigious prizes, including a Nietzsche-preis in Whitaker, Swan and Shadow: Yeats’s Dialogue with
History, 2nd ed., Washington: Catholic University of 1920, and a Goethepreis in 1929.
America Press, DC, 1989. Ziegler most explicitly developed his view of
Asian religions in his book Der ewige Buddho
WILLIAM GORSKI (1922), which is in four sections, discussing Bud-
dha as a Protestant; Buddha as witness; Buddha as
Ziegler, Leopold, * 30.4.1881 Karlsruhe knower; and Buddha as an East-West figure. Along
(Germany), +t 25.10.1958 Uberlingen with his friend and correspondent Hermann Key-
(Germany) serling, Ziegler was an early and often overlooked
major figure in what is now called inter-religious
Ziegler is an important 2oth-century figure in the dialogue, perhaps most notable for his early recog-
theosophic current [> Christian Theosophy], not nition of the impact that Asian religious traditions
least because he sought to understand Asian reli- could have in the West, even if he himself did not
gious traditions, particularly Buddhism, while have access to much in the way of original texts or
developing a theosophically influenced Christian extensive translations from Asian religions, and
mystical perspective in a world context. even if — as he himself later wrote — his earlier pres-
Ziegler was born to a reasonably well-off family; entation of Buddhism was not without error.
his father was a merchant. Relatively early in life he That Ziegler saw himself in the theosophic tra-
became friends with a number of artists, including dition is evident even from the dedication of his
the painter Karl Hofer, and the sculptor Karl massive work Menschwerdung, a word meaning
Albiker, who would remain a lifelong friend. It is “Becoming Human” and a pivotal concept for >
thus not surprising that particularly his early works Jacob Boehme. Ziegler dedicated the book to
deal with artistic topics: see e.g. Die Tyrannis des ‘Jakob Boehme, Soren Kierkegaard, and Franz
Gesamtkunstwerks (The Tyranny of the Gesamt- Baader’, and offers a genuine contribution to the
kunstwerk, 1910), an attack on Wagner’s work, or theosophic tradition while discussing the revela-
Florentinische Introduktion zu einer Philosophie tion of Christ in relation to Lao Tzu and Buddha,
der Architektur und der bildenden Kinste (Floren- Shankaracarya and Ramanuyja. In other words,
tine Introduction to a Philosophy of Architecture he began to develop a uniquely theosophic ap-
and the Visual Arts, 1911). Ziegler’s writings were proach to the emerging concept of comparative
to range over a vast array of topics, from the arts to religion.
economics, from politics and Platonism to compar- In an article published late in life, entitled “Von
ative religion and theosophy. In this broad range of der Muttergottheit’ (On the Mother Deity, 1953),
subjects, he was rather similar to one of his great Ziegler sketched an overview of the Sophianic tra-
influences, > Franz von Baader. ditions of the West. He refers to such figures as
Ziegler studied in Heidelberg, and his disserta- Schelling and Solovyoy, alluding as well to his own
tion, Der abendlandische Rationalismus und der view that only under the sign of Sophia the split
Eros (Occidental Rationalism and Eros), under the between Europe and Eurasia could be healed - a
direction of Ernst Haeckel at Jena, was approved healing that he saw as of paramount importance in
in 1905. During this period, Ziegler studied the a world so given to conflict and conflagration. In
works of Schopenhauer, Eckhart, — Schelling, brief, one could say that Ziegler represents a 20th-
Baader, and Hegel. He lived at Uberlingen until his century continuation of the ecumenical intellectual
death in 1958, carrying on an extensive correspon- theosophic current represented in the r9th century
dence, writing occasional intellectual columns for by Franz von Baader. Ziegler is a significant figure
newspapers, and publishing books. in the history of theosophy, and his work still
A prolific if somewhat difficult author, Ziegler’s awaits full scholarly analysis.

--- Page 606 ---
ZIEGLER 1182
Gestaltwandel der Gotter, Berlin: Fischer, 1920 @ Der lack of regard for the proper rituals and for the
ewige Buddho, Berlin: Otto Reichl, 1922 @ Das Heilige notions to be embodied. The central ideas of later
Reich der Deutschen, Darmstadt: Otto Reichl, 1925 @ Zoroastrianism were developed mainly on the basis
Zwischen Mensch und Wirtshaft, Darmstadt: Otto
of the Gathas and the other Old Avestan texts. In
Reichl, 1927 @ Magna Charta einer Schule, Darmstadt:
later Zoroastrianism, Zoroaster has become the
Otto Reichl, 1928 # Der europdische Geist, Darm-
stadt: Otto Reichl, 1929 @ Uberlieferung, Leipzig: central figure in the history of the world, for whose
Jakob Hegner, 1936; Munchen: Kosel, 1942 chief responsibility, bringing the revelation to the
Appolons letzte Epiphanie, Leipzig: Jakob Hegner, world, preparations were made already before the
1937 @ Menschwerdung, Olten: Summa, 1948 # Von creation of the world and whose posthumous sons
Platons Staatheit zum christlichen Staat, Olten: will ensure the victory of good over evil and the
Summa, 1948 @ Spdtlese eigener Hand, Minchen:
renovation of the world at the end of time.
Kosel, 1953 @ Das Lehrgesprach vom Allgemeinen
Zoroaster became known to the Greeks in a Menschen in Sieben Abenden, Hamburg: Marion von
Schréder, 1956 @ Briefe, r901-1958, Munchen: Késel, comparatively early period, chiefly as the founder
1963 @ Fragments in English translation: Arthur of the (Persian) priesthood of the Magi and, conse-
Versluis (ed.), Wisdom’s Book: The Sophia Anthology, quently, as the founder of > “magic”, > astrology
St. Paul: Paragon House, 2000, 249-260. and many of the arcane sciences. The Western
image of Zoroaster owes little to Zoroastrian
Lit.: Sophie Latour, “Larchétype de l’Androgyne chez
traditions and seems to have developed inde-
L. Ziegler”, in: L’Androgyne, Paris: Albin Michel,
1986, 197-211 @ Erwin Stein (ed.), Leopold Ziegler: pendently. In the intellectual history of Europe,
Denker des erinnernden Urwissens, Deuter des Wilt- Zoroaster was reinvented several times and his
sinnes, Weg-Weiser in die Zukunft, Freiburg: Aurum, name often served to establish authority. He was
1981 @ Martha Schneider-FaSbaender, Leopold Ziegler, seen as a very ancient philosopher or king who had
Leben und Werk, Pfullingen: G. Neske, 1978. attained the highest imaginable level of knowledge
of divine matters. Although the high regard for
ARTHUR VERSLUIS Zoroaster did not go uncontested, he was the sub-
ject of intense interest among Pythagorean and Pla-
Zoroaster tonic philosophers. Although his name does not
occur in the corpus Platonicum as it is usually
Zoroaster is the Graeco-Latin name of the Iran- defined, he is present in the Greater Alcibiades, the
ian prophet Zarathustra (Avestan zara6ustra), who authorship of which is currently disputed. In antiq-
is thought to have lived around 1ooo B.C. in south- uity, however, it was firmly believed to have been
ern Central Asia. He is regarded as the founder of written by Plato himself and, indeed, to offer the
Zoroastrianism by all Zoroastrians and by most best introduction to his ideas. In the development
modern scholars, although credible information of Platonism in antiquity, there is a certain move
about his life and teachings is very sparse. In classi- towards an “Iranian” style of dualism (opposing
cal (i.e. pre-modern) Zoroastrianism, the whole of good and evil in addition to the opposition between
the Avesta, the revealed literature of Zoroastrian- spirit and matter). In this connection, Zoroaster is
ism, which comprises the texts of the Avesta in regularly discussed, both in his own right and in
Avestan and their commentaries in a vernacular relation to Plato. In late antiquity, Zoroaster was
(chiefly Middle Persian or Pahlavi), is attributed to seen as one of the fountainheads of ancient wis-
Zoroaster. In modern scholarship, he is considered dom, on a par with > Hermes Trismegistus.
the author of a tiny portion of the Avesta, written In the European Middle Ages, Zoroaster is
in a more archaic variety of Avestan and consisting scarcely ever mentioned, but in the Renaissance,
of the five Gathas (“songs”) and a short prose rit- his reputation became firmly established among
ual text known as the Yasna haptaphaiti (“worship Western thinkers in a double development. First, >
of seven chapters”). Although the Gathas are Georgius Gemistus Plethon (+ 1355-1454) attrib-
exceptionally difficult to understand, they seem to uted the Chaldaean Oracles, a collection of oracu-
be ritual texts extolling the goodness and greatness lar sayings from (late) antiquity, to him and thereby
of the god Ahura Mazda (“the wise lord”) and out- sparked renewed interest in his supposed ancient
lining ways for humans to please him by perform- knowledge. In his fight against Aristotelianism, or
ing the proper rituals and by embodying certain his defence of Platonism, Plethon even went so far
divine notions, such as truth and righteousness. as to surmise that Plato himself taught nothing but
The Gathas are partly strongly opposed to a group the lore of Zoroaster’s followers, the Magi. The
of outsiders, who are characterised mainly by their attribution of the Chaldaean Oracles to Zoroaster

--- Page 607 ---
1183 ZOSIMUS OF PANOPOLIS
went largely uncontested in the pre-modern period. have, for instance, yielded “Zoroasters” as spokes-
Therefore, wherever the authority of the Oracles was men of esoteric philosophy in connection with the
invoked, Zoroaster’s name was bound to surface. natural sciences (G.Th. Fechner; $.D. Laing), as the
A second development began with > Marsilio embodiment of a non-moral philosophy (FE. Nietz-
Ficino, who often refers to Zoroaster and the Magi, sche) and as the precursor or founder of various
especially in his elaboration of the notion of a religious movements that are more or less con-
prisca philosophia | Tradition]. In fact, Zoroaster nected with the teachings of the > Theosophical
figures not only as the author of the Chaldaean Society (such as the “Grail Message” of Abd Ru-
Oracles, whose influence on Ficino has been con- Shin and Mazdaznan). Interestingly, this tradition
siderable, but also as the first of the “lawgivers”, has found its way back into Zoroastrianism, with
earlier even than > Moses. Ficino attributed the the development of a theosophical interpretation
fundamental notion of the triad of God, Ghost and of that religion among some of its adherents.
Soul (and its many permutations) to Zoroaster,
whom Plato merely interpreted. Lit.: M. Boyce, A History of Zoroastrianism I: The
Early Period, Leiden, 19963 @ J. Duchesne-Guillemin, These two elements, the triadic structure of
The Western Response to Zoroaster, Oxford, 1958
Zoroaster’s thought (based on Platonic materials
A.V.W. Jackson, Zoroaster: The Prophet of Ancient
and on the Chaldaean Oracles) and the belief that Iran, New York, 1965* @ A. de Jong, Traditions ofthe
Zoroaster was the chief authority behind Plato have Magi: Zoroastrianism in Greek and Latin Literature,
ensured a lasting popularity of Zoroaster’s name Leiden, 1997 @ J. Rose, The Image of Zoroaster: The
among an astonishing line of (chiefly esoteric) Euro- Persian Mage through European Eyes, New York,
pean philosophers, especially in the 15th and 16th 2000 @ M. Stausberg, Faszination Zarathushtra:
Zoroaster und die europdische Religionsgeschichte der
centuries. With the decline of interest in the Chal-
Frihen Neuzeit, 2 vols., Berlin, 1998.
daean Oracles, one would expect the image of
Zoroaster to have become less influential as well,
but this does not seem to have been the case. On the ALBERT DE JONG
contrary, his reputation as an early philosopher was
Zorzi, Francesco > Giorgio, Francescoso firmly entrenched that few authors thought it
possible to omit him from their works. As Stausberg
interestingly observes, however, from the 17th cen- Zosimus of Panopolis, fl. late 3rd/early
tury onwards, a new, historical, interpretation grad- 4th century Panopolis
ually overshadows Zoroaster’s fame as the inventor
of magic or the first of the philosophers. The first alchemist from antiquity whose works
In the 18th century, Zoroaster came to be can be studied somewhat more firmly in historical
enlisted as the chief spokesman of the Enlighten- context is Zosimus of Panopolis, who lived in
ment, especially in his capacity of bearer of a pro- Egypt around the beginning of the 4th century C.E.
found, non-Biblical, ethical religion. The evidence Despite his own constant protestations that he is
used for this interpretation was, on the whole, slim, merely relying on earlier authorities and bringing
but the importance of the thesis, according to nothing new, Zosimus is generally seen as a pivotal
which “history shows” that it was possible for figure in the development of ancient > alchemy. In
an ethical religion to appear without any connec- particular, the development of alchemy from a
tion to the Bible, was considerable. The high ex- practical metallurgical and technical craft to a fully
pectations of this (largely imagined) religion of developed mystical religion, involving practical
Zoroaster among the Encyclopaedists suffered a experiments in conjunction with a full-blown theo-
well-known blow with the publication of a transla- logical system, is attributed to Zosimus both by his
tion of the Avesta by A.H. Anquetil du Perron. This successors and in modern scholarship. Zosimus
led to a long-drawn battle over the authenticity of seems to have been the last alchemist from antiq-
that text. Since that battle, there have been two uity to constantly explore and expand the practical
separate lines of development: scholarly research experiments, of gilding, dyeing and transforming.
of Zoroaster and Zoroastrianism on the basis of He was also the first to systematize a theosophical
Iranian materials and the living tradition; and the system underlying those experiments.
remarkably strong continuation of the “European” Almost everything we know of Zosimus’ life and
tradition of using Zoroaster’s name to invoke works must be culled from his own texts. His suc-
authority for entirely non-Zoroastrian religious or cessors frequently quote him and refer to him, but
philosophical systems. The roth and 2oth centuries offer very little biographical information. For them,

--- Page 608 ---
ZOSIMUS OF PANOPOLIS 1184
Zosimus had already acquired an unassailable are entirely in the dark. From the fact that he men-
position of sanctity. The “very holy” Zosimus, tions the Serapeum in Alexandria as a functional
“crown of the philosophers”, is chiefly invoked in organisation, one may infer that he lived before the
later literature to add prestige and authority to destruction of that temple in 391. The fact that he
ideas and practices. As is the case with the majority quotes Julius Africanus (who died in 240) and
of alchemical texts from antiquity, Zosimus’ works refers to the threat of > Manichaeism, would sug-
have chiefly come down to us in Byzantine miscel- gest a date somewhere in the late 3rd or early 4th
lanies, containing fragments of texts and whole century. Especially the reference to ~ Mani has
texts of a large variety of authors. Among these been connected with the anti-Manichaean edict of
authors, Zosimus is often represented, but it is Diocletian of 302, but since Zosimus’ reference to
frequently difficult to single out texts that can be Mani appears to derive from a Christian source, a
properly ascribed to him. Alongside these original direct connection with Diocletian (who persecuted
texts, there are two further important collections Christians even more than Manichaeans) seems
of sources. The first of these are translations of unlikely. Nevertheless, Zosimus must have lived in
Zosimus’ texts in Syriac, Arabic, and Latin. The a time when the Manichaean presence in Egypt was
second are fragments from Zosimus’ texts that are sufficiently gaining in strength to provoke strong
quoted (often with titles of the texts) by later reactions from Christians as well as from the impe-
authorities. rial administration, which fits the early 4th century
Much less is known of Zosimus’ life than could very well. J. Letrouit has recently suggested a
be considered desirable, but a few aspects emerge slightly earlier date for Zosimus on the assumption
from the texts. Zosimus was an Egyptian, who that Zosimus refers to Mani as still being alive,
must have grown up in a milieu where local Egypt- which would place him before the year 278, but the
ian culture was in constant contact with Greek tra- wording of the text does not really allow of such a
ditions. Most sources agree that he was born in confident interpretation: Zosimus may be quoting
Panopolis (present-day Akhmim) in the Thebaid. an earlier text or may have been unaware of the
Panopolis was a prominent place in Upper Egypt fact of Mani’s death.
that had grown around the temple of the god Min. Zosimus’ works were catalogued or published in
Textual finds from Panopolis show that the Egyp- antiquity in a number of different systems. The
tian religion was a thriving affair in late antiquity, strongest tradition claims that he wrote a series of
even though the city also acquired fame as a texts that were divided according to the letters of
centre of early Christianity. The presence of Gnos- the Greek alphabet. Of these, only the book On the
tic [> Gnosticism], Hermetic [~ Hermetism], sacred letter Omega has been preserved, but refer-
Greek, and Christian traditions in the area is evi- ences are also found to the book kappa in Zosimus’
denced profusely by the codices that were discov- own writings, and to the book sigma in a later
ered in Nag Hammadi, halfway between Panopolis commentator. The Syriac fragments of Zosimus
and Thebes. Zosimus records a visit to Memphis frequently refer to the books of various letters of
and may have seen the Serapeum in Alexandria. the Aramaic alphabet. A second division is chiefly
Many scholars, in fact, believe that Zosimus must found in the manuscripts: it is the collection of
have spent at least part of his life in Alexandria, texts under the heading Authentic Commentaries
mainly because of the large number of texts and or Authentic Memorials (gnésia hypomnémata),
ideas from many different sources and communities which may have subsumed the “alphabetical”
that can be found in his works. Prominent among ordering, although this is not certain. In addition to
these are Jewish sources, as well as Christian and texts headed under these rubrics, many other texts
Greek texts and traditions. In his works, Zosimus are known by name (the Final Count, the Book of
quotes Homer and Pindar, Plato and > Zoroaster, Sophe, Imouth, etc.).
the Septuagint, texts from the Corpus Hermeticum The addressee of a number of texts is a woman
[> Hermetic Literature] and many (mostly named Theosebeia, who is sometimes referred to as
unnamed) Egyptian, Jewish and Christian texts. Zosimus’ “sister”. The authentic texts of Zosimus
These quotes and the evidence of a sound knowl- offer little information on her, other than the fact
edge of the chief intellectual traditions of his time, that she must have been a practising alchemist her-
would seem to be most at home in Alexandria, but self and looked upon Zosimus as her teacher. Syr-
it is by no means excluded that knowledge of all iac fragments (largely unpublished) fill in some
these authorities and ideas could have been gained blanks. These fragments show that Theosebeia and
in Upper Egypt. Zosimus had different opinions about the public
As to the most likely dates of Zosimus’ life, we character of alchemy. Zosimus blames Theosebeia

--- Page 609 ---
1185 ZOSIMUS OF PANOPOLIS
for containing within a small circle knowledge that similar mythical pattern can be found, which is
could and should be shared with everyone who is related in more alchemical symbolic language, with
interested. strong Hermetic overtones.
The majority of Zosimus’ writings seem to have The Hermetic legacy in Zosimus is, therefore,
been practical alchemical texts, discussing furnaces considerable. It is also to be found in the most
and the shape of the vessels used, the substances bizarre texts of Zosimus to have been preserved,
involved and the conditions to be observed. In the so-called Visions. These relate dream-like
addition, however, a number of texts reveal the visions, in which the “I” of the text describes series
theological system underlying those experiments. of purifications in the language of ritual. These
These texts have been studied with much greater descriptions, containing images of death and muti-
attention than the technical texts and it is to these lation, autophagy and despair, have been inter-
that we shall confine ourselves here. Both in the preted both as symbolic descriptions of the
Letter Omega and in the Final Count, Zosimus alchemical processes and, famously by > C.G.
reacts sharply against the tendency, prevalent Jung, as actual descriptions of inner experiences. If
among his contemporaries, to combine the work of the choice is between these two, the alchemical
alchemy with > astrology or > magic. The argu- interpretation is certainly to be preferred and the
ment concerns a type of tincture known as “propi- bodies being mutilated are in all likelihood refer-
tious”, which suggests that success in obtaining ences to the metals under treatment, but the
these tinctures depends on the observance of the imagery itself, of steps leading up to an altar, of
proper times or periods to engage in the experi- mixing-bowls and white-clad priests, has most
ments. This procedure is described both in astro- convincingly been interpreted as deriving from
logical terms and in terms of working with one’s Hermetic literature and, possibly, ritual.
personal demon and is flatly rejected by Zosimus. Scholars have claimed that for Zosimus, the
His chief objections go to the heart of the nature ‘procedures of conventional alchemy are strictly
of alchemy and its practitioners. Alchemy, for preparatory to the purification and perfection of
Zosimus, is an art that can only work if two condi- the soul’ (Fowden 1986, 123). Many texts, by con-
tions are met: the technical requirements must be trast, suggest that purification of the soul was, for
perfect and perfectly understood and the alchemist Zosimus, a conditio sine qua non for the alchemi-
must have gone through a process of mental prepa- cal work, which could lead to the knowledge
ration or purification to gain knowledge of his real allowing a person to escape the bonds of Fate.
self and his ultimate origin. This origin lies outside
the seven spheres of the created world, which con- M. Berthelot & C. Ruelle, Collections des anciens
alchimistes grecs, Paris, 1888 (19677; 3 vols.) # M.
stitute Fate. The guardians of the seven spheres,
Mertens, Les alchimistes grecs IV.1. Zosime de Pano-
whom Zosimus calls “watchers” or “pretenders” polis. Mémoires authentiques, Paris, 1995 # H.M.
and who are obviously planetary beings, distract Jackson, Zosimos of Panopolis, On the Letter Omega,
man from the knowledge of his origins. Any Missoula, 1978 @ R. Duval, L’alchimie syriaque (= M.
alchemist who uses ~ astrology, therefore, by Berthelot (ed.), La chimie au moyen age II), Paris, 1893
definition cannot escape the works of Fate and is (Syriac fragments) @ Jean Letrouit, ‘Hermetism and
Alchemy: Contribution to the Study of Marciaiusled astray. In order to explain this, Zosimus
Graecus 299 (= M)’, in: Carlos Gilly & Cis van Heer-
describes the origin of the first man, Thoth-Adam,
tum (eds.), Magia, alchimia, scienza dal ’400 al ’700 /
who has a double progeny. His material being is the Magic, Alchemy and Science 15th-18th Centuries,
product of Fate, but his inner, spiritual self, is a Centro Di, 2002, 85-104 (extr. of On the Letter
being known mainly as phos (a Greek word that Oinega, Greek with French translation).
can mean both “light” and “man”). This spiritual
Lit.: M.J. Edwards, “The Vessel of Zosimus the
man was seduced twice: once by Fate, to unite itself
Alchemist”, Zeitschrift fiir Papyrologie und Epi-
with the material Adam and thus constitute the first graphik 90 (1992), 55-64 # A.J. Festugiére, La révéla-
man, and a second time by the creation of woman, tion d’ Hermes Trismégiste I: L’astrologie et les sciences
which further bound him to the material world. In occultes, Paris, 1944 @ G. Fowden, The Egyptian Her-
The Letter Omega, Zosimus chiefly uses Greek, mes: A Historical Approach to the Late Pagan Mind,
Jewish and Christian “proof-texts” to make his Princeton, 1986, 120-126 @ Kyle Fraser, “Zosimos of
Panopolis and the Book of Enoch: Alchemy as Forbid-
point, up to the point of introducing Jesus Christ as
den Knowledge”, Aries 4:2 (2004) @ M. Idel, “The
the person who will guide mankind back to its ulti- Origin of Alchemy according to Zosimos and a
mate origins, but he invokes these texts mainly to Hebrew Parallel”, Revue des etudes juives 145 (1986),
establish connections with local Egyptian ideas, 117-124 @C.G. Jung, “Die Visionen des Zosimos”, in:
including Hermetic texts. In the Final Count, a very C.G. Jung, Gesammelte Werke 13 (1978), 67-121

--- Page 610 ---
ZOSIMUS OF PANOPOLIS 1186
J. Letrouit, “Chronologie des alchimistes grecs”, in:
Didier Kahn & Sylvain Matton (eds.), Alchimie: Art,
histoire et mythes (Textes et Travaux de Chrysopeeia
1), Paris/Milan, 1995, 11-93 D. Stolzenberg, “Un-
propitious Tinctures: Alchemy, Astrology & Gnosis
According to Zosimos of Panopolis”, Archives Inter-
nationales d’Histoire des Sciences 49 (1999), 3-31.
ALBERT DE JONG

--- Page 611 ---
INDEX OF GROUPS AND ORGANIZATIONS
A..A.., 282-283, 285, 287, 379, 901-902 Baiolenses, 246
Adonistenbund, 381 Barbeloites, 1067
Aetherius Society, 1143 Basilidians, 240
Agape Lodge, 904 Berengaria Order of Druids, 832
Albanenses, 246 Besant Educational Trust, 1122
Alchemical Society of Nuremberg, 53, 1014 Besant Memorial School, 1122
Alpha et Omega, 550, 784 Besant Scout Camping Centre, 1122
Alumbrados, 603 Blavatsky Lodge, 171, 182-183, 555
American National Association of Spiritualists, Bogomils, 90, 192-194, 242-245, 309, 637, 707,
1080 758
American Swedenborg Printing and Publishing Borborites, 194-196, 228, 411, 429, 868
Society, 1106 Boris Mouravieff Association, 806
Amis Réunis, 47, 279 Brethren of the Angelic Life, see: Angelic
Amitiés Spirituelles, 948-949, 1063 Brethren
AMORG, see: Ancient and Mystical Order of the Bridge to Freedom, 588, 1094
Rose Cross British Druid Order, 832
Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, 266, 380, Brotherhood of Eulis, 902
387, 552, 645, 768, 941 Brotherhood of Myriam, 782
Ancient and Mysterious Order of the Brotherhood of Saturn, 379
Brotherhood of Saturn, 380 Briider Sankt Johannes des Evangelisten aus
Ancient and Mystical Order of the Rose Cross, Asien in Europa, see: Asiatic Brethren
555 156, 199, 329, 402, 587, 692-693, Builders of the Adytum, 1018
781-783, 853, 903, LO18—-1020, 1095
Ancient and Traditional Martinist Order, 782 Cainites, 227-229, 429, 895, 939
Ancient Druid Order, 831 Caliphate OTO, 905-906
Ancient Rosae Crucis, ro1g9 Caodaist movement, 659
Angelic Brethren, 392-394, 963 Carpocratians, 228, 240-242, 411, 429-430,
Animal Welfare Centre, 1122 769, 1071
Anthroposophical Society, 86, 88-89, 267, 825, Cathars, 90, 194, 242-247, 436, 637, 707, 758,
986, 1038, LO9O-1091, II21I, 1423-1124 826-828, 984, 994, IOT9, 1058
Antiquus Arcanus Ordo Rosae Rubae Aureae Catholic Order of the Rosy Cross of Temple and
Crucis, 1tor9 Grail, 1018
Aquarian Educational Group, 160 Cayce/Reilly School of Massotherapy, 248
Arcana Arcanorum, 108 Central Association of Spiritualists, 1080
Arcana Workshops, 160 Centre d’Etudes Chrétiennes Esotériques, 806
Arcane School, 158-160, 388, 1023, 1093-1094, Centre Esotérique Oriental de France, 162
1130 Céphalegie, 279
Architectes Africains, 329 Chaldeo-Latin Church, 402
Archontics, 89-91, 141, 410-411, 429, 1064, Chevaliers Bienfaisants de la Cité Sainte,
1066 256-258,461, 593, 1032
Argenteum Astrum, see: A..A.. Chevaliers de l’Aigle Noir, 1171
Arica Institute, 848 Chevaliers de la Croix, 852
Ariosophical School, 96 Chevaliers et Dames du Divin Paraclet, 255
Arya Samaj, LI1I15-1117 Children of Satan, 1037
Asatru, 828, 832-833 Christengemeinschaft, 1ro91
Asatru Alliance, 832 Christian Mystic Lodge, 378
Asatri Free Assembly, 832 Christian Science, 300, 378, 587, 672, 861-863
Ascended Master University, 1095 Christian Science Theological Seminary, 863
Asiatic Brethren, 47, 107-109, 215, 226, 266, Church and Order of Light, 487
357s 387, 604, 643, 1168 Church of Carmel, 402
Assembly of Good Christians, 828 Church of the New Jeruzalem, 1105
Association for Research and Enlightenment, Church of “The New Thought”, 863
247-248 Church of Religious Science, see: Religious
Association of National Investigators, 248 Science
Association of Sananda and Sanat Kumara, 1143 Church of Satan, 308, 382, 1036-1037
Astrological Lodge of the Theosophical Society, Church of the Higher Life, 863
138 Church Universal and Triumphant, see: Summit
Astrometeorological Society, 133 Lighthouse
Astrum Argentinum, see: A..A.. CIRCES, 1020
Atlantic University, 248 Circle of Unknown Superiors, see: Traditional
Audians, 141-142, 429, 1065-1066 Martinist Order

--- Page 612 ---
1188 INDEX OF GROUPS AND ORGANIZATIONS
College of Psychic Sciences, 1080 Frankfurter Ring, 324
Collegium pietatis, 890 Fratellanza Terapeutica Magica di Miriam, see:
Community of the Inner Light, 436 Fraternity of Miriam
Concorrenses, 246 Fraternitas Lucis Hermetica, see: Hermetic
Confidents de Saint-Jean, 461 Brotherhood of Light
Confraternity of the Rose Cross, to19g-1020 Fraternitas Luminis, 380
Council of British Druid Orders, 832 Fraternitas Rosae Crucis, ro18
Fraternitas Rosicruciana Antiqua, 903, 906,
Deutsche Volkskirche, 311 1020
Dievturl, 833 Fraternitas Saturni, 379-382, 743, 904, 906
Dievturiba, 833 Fraternitas Uranis, 380
Divine Science, 861, 863, TII5 Fraternité des Polaires, 402
Draskovitch System, 1168 Fraternity of Miriam, 348, 671
Droit Humain, Le, 380, 388 Fraternity of the Inner Light, 377-378, 550
Dublin Hermetic Societies, 555-557, 1179 Fratres Lucis, 215
Dublin Lodge of the Theosophical Society, see: Freemasonry, 45, 51, 95-96, 106-107, 155-156,
Dublin Hermetic Societies 204, 219, 225-226, 249-250, 256-258, 263,
265, 288, 298, 322, 329, 332, 334, 341, 348,
Eastern School of Theosophy, 171, 1089, 354-356, 368, 381, 382-388, 401-402, 433,
II19-1120 441, 455-456, 461, 541, 546, $51-552, 579,
Ebionites, 330, 430 594-596, 602, 604, 643, 645, 671, 676, 690,
Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica, see: Gnostic Church 693-694, 697-699, 711-712, 748-749, 768,
Ecole Hermétique, 442, 914 779; 779-780, 782-783, 788-789, 816, 826,
Edgar Cayce Foundation, 248 829, 848, 850-853, 872-873, 889, 898, 909,
Edgar Cayce Hospital, 248 914-915, 930, 932, 934, 941, 943, 965, 976,
Eglise Gnostique Apostolique, 402 979, 987-988, 994, LOl4-1018, 1020, 1023,
Eglise Gnostique Universelle, see: Gnostic 1032-1035, 1058, 1074, 1089, 1106, IIIT,
Church I1i30, 1160, 1164-1165, 1168, 1170-1172
Egyptian Order (Caetani), 671 Freie Hochschule fiir Geisteswissenschaft, 1091
Egyptian Rite (Cagliostro), 225-226, 329, 357, French Catholic Church, 355
5525 979 Fréres Ainés de la Rose Croix, 55
Egyptian Rite of the Ancient Mysteries Fréres de la Croix, 461
(Leadbeater), 686 Fruchtbringende Gesellschaft, 75
Elchasai, 330-332, 429, 657, 704, 753, 756 FUDOFSI, see: Fédération Universelle des
Elus Coéns, 47, 249, 263, 265, 279, 332-334, Ordres, Fraternités et Sociétés Initiatiques
351, 461, 603, 629, 742, 772-773, 775-7775 FUDOSI, see: Federatio Universalis Dirigens
932-935, 988, 1024, 1026, 1060, I17I-1173 Ordines Societasque Initiationis
Elxai, see: Elchasai
Emma Hopkins College of Christian Science, 863 Gallican Church of France, 402
Esoteric Section of the Theosophical Society, 159, Geistchristliche Religionsgemeinschaft, 3 10
171, 182, 546, 554, 714, 785, I119 General Conference of the New Church, 1106,
Esoterische Schule (Steiner), 899, 1089, 1091 1108
Essene School of Life, 3.43 General Church of the New Jerusalem,
Essenes, 340-343, 351, 1020 ITO8-1109
Estoile Internelle, 255 General Convention of the New Jerusalem, 1108
Euchites, 193 Germanenorden, 96, 693-694, 848
Exegetic and Philanthropic Society, 605, Giordano Bruno Bund, 1087-1088
IIO5—-1106 Gnostic Brotherhood, 994
Existential and Psychological Training and Gnostic Catholic Church, see: Ecclesia Gnostica
Encounter Centre, 323 Catholica
Gnostic Church, 400-403, 442, 780, 782,
Family of Love, 687 826-827, 900-903, 1020
FAR+C, see: Freres Ainés de la Rose Croix Gnostic Movement, 1020
Fedeli d’Amore, 296, 357-360 Gold- und Rosenkreuz, 45, 47, 51, 107-108,
Federagao Espirita, Brasileira, 1081 226-227, 266, 369, 387, 546, 551-552,
Fédération Universelle des Ordres, Fraternités et SPE SOR er re emer Pet Sea
Sociétés Initiatiques, 402, 781, 1018 II
Federatio Universalis Dirigens Ordines Gorsedd of the Bards of Britain, 831
Societasque Initiationis, 402, 693, 781, To18 Grail Movement, 436-438
Fellowship of Crotona, 830 Grand Jeu, 438-441
Fellowship of the Rosy Cross, 550, 1165 Great White Brotherhood Lodge, 692
Filial Piety, 599 Groupe de Lougsor, 1046
First Christians’ Essene Church, 3 43 Groupe indépendant d’études ésotériques, 914,
Franco-Haitian OTO, see: Ordo Templi Orientis 1063
Antiqua Gruppo di Ur, 345-347, 743, 979, 1039

--- Page 613 ---
INDEX OF GROUPS AND ORGANIZATIONS 1189
Harmonisten, 321 380, 387, 707, 828, 849-851, 873, rors,
Health and Rejuvenation Research Center, 248 1057-1058, 1130
Heaven’s Gate, 1141, 1143 Kremmerzian Martinist Order, 782
Hell Fire Club, 1035
Hermetic Brotherhood of Light, 487, 902 Learned and Christian Society, roo9
Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor, 53, 163, 401, Lectorium Rosicrucianum, 199, 436, 463, 542,
486-487, 540, 552, 554, 902, 978, 1079, 827, 986, 993-994, 1018-1020
Gee a ee, Liberal Catholic Church, 388, 685-686,
Hermetic Order of Egypt, 552 T12%-1122
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, 53, 55, Lighthouse of Freedom, 1094
108, 164, 281-282, 284-285, 308, 377-378, List Society, 693-694
381, 388, 436, 541, 544-550, 552, 554-555, London Lodge of the Theosophical Society, 553,
614, 631, 646-647, 664, 692, 742-743, GGAS) Tali
783-784, 829, 888, 898, 902, 966, 1018, London Spiritualists Alliance, 1080
IO9I-I1093,IIII, L164—-1165, 1168-1170, Lorber Society, 701
1179-1180 Lord’s New Church, 1108-1109
Hermetic Society (Kingsford/Maitland), 3, 181, Lucis Trust, 159
3275 545, $5O-551, 552-555, 664, 783, 959,
IL18-1119, 1169 M..M..M..., 901-902
Herrnhuter, 956 Mages of Memphis, 329
Hidden Church of the Holy Grail, 436 Mandaeans, 414, 636, 657, 704, 751-756, 786
High Egyptian Freemasonry, see: Egyptian Rite Manichaeism, 84, 121, 142, 192, 194,
(Cagliostro) 242-243, 366, 417, 424, 636, 657, 707, 751,
Hoher Armanen-Orden, 693-694 756-764, 827, 983-984, 989, 994, 1052,
Homes of Truth movement, 863 1066, 1184
Hopkins Metaphysical Association, 863 Marcianists, 240
House of Solomon, 155-156 Martinist and Synarchist Order, 781
Martinist Grand Chapter, 780
I AM Activity, 587-588, 1141 Martinist Martinezist Order, 781
Illuminated Theosophers, 266 Martinist Order, 163, 266, 384, 401-402,
Illuminaten, 107-108, 326, 590-597, 601, 676, 441-442, 671, 770, 780-783, 826, 899,
750, 899, 985, O15, 1017 914-915, 948-949, 1063
Illuminati Order, 380 Martinist Order of the Elus Cohens, 781
Illuminés d’Avignon, 47, 51, 551, 597-600, 604, Maryamiyah, 848, 1044
942, I106 Mazdaznan, 342, 1183
Illuminés Théosophes, 1107 Meditation Groups, Inc, 160
Independent and Rectified Rite, 549-550, Men of Goodwill, 160
1092-1093, 1164 Menandrians, 240
Inner Group of the Esoteric Section of the Mental Science Association, 864
Theosophical Society, 171, 554 Messalians, 192, 194, 430
Inspirierte, Die, 889 Mevlevi order, 849
Institute for Cultural Research, 847 Michelianer, 454
Institute for the Harmonious Development of Montessori International, 1095
Man, 446 Moravian Brothers, 269-270, 461, 603, 676
International Academy of the Arts, 1122 Mouvement Cosmique, 163, 487, [112-1113
International Center for Comparative Spiritual Museum of Paris, 280
Research, 271 Mysteria Mystica Maxima, see: M..M..M..
International Committee for Charitable and Mystica /Eterna, 899
Social Works, 1020 Mystical Association of the West, 780
International Grail Foundation, 437-438
International New Thought Alliance, 861 Naassenes,406-407, 411, 429-430, 475,
International School of the Golden Rosy Cross, 582-583, 707, 820-822, 895
see: Lectorium Rosicrucianum Nagqshbandi order, 847
Italian Council of the Martinist Order, 782 National Association of Spiritualists, 1080
Italian Philosophic Rite, 979 National Union of Spiritualists, 218
New Church, 174, 202, 400, 711, 862, 1097,
Jakob Boehme Society, 1 98 IIO§5—1108-—1109, 1131
Johannite Church, 355, 402, 852, 976 New Israel, 598-599
New Jerusalem Church, 173
Kalakshetra, 1122 Nicolaitans, 194-195, 867-869
Keepers of the Flame Fraternity, 1094-1095 Northern School, 604, 676
Knights of the Cross, 354-355 Nouvelle Ecole de Magie, 343
Knights of the Red Cross of Rome and Nouvelle Eglise Gnostique Universelle, 401
Constantine, 552 Nova Hierosolyma, see: Lord’s New Church
Knights Templar, 108, 257-258, 354-355, 3595 Novikov circle, 873

--- Page 614 ---
I190 INDEX OF GROUPS AND ORGANIZATIONS
(Euvre de la Miséricorde, 579 Prague Theosophical Lodge, 789
Olcott Educational Society, 1122 Priory of Sion, 828
Olcott Memorial High School, 1122 Pristine Church of Rosicruciae, 692
Old Catholic Church, r1r21 Pro Fide et Charitate, 1106
Ophites, 180, 227-228, 429, 703, 820, 895-898, Prodicians, 975
939, 1065-1066,1146 Psychic Reading Corporation, 248
Ordem do Graal na Terra, 437 Pythianae and Eulis, 978
Orden der Ritter und Bruder des Lichts, 107
Orden Mentalischer Bauherren, 380 Qadiri Order, 218
Order of Bards, Ovates and Druids, 83 1-832 Quakers, 466-467
Order of Ishmael, 552 Quest Society, 785
Order of St. George, 217
Order of St. Michael, 217 Radical French Church, 355
Order of the “Most Perfectibles”, 590 Raelian Movement, 1143
Order of the Cross and Serpent, 487 Reclaiming collective, 831
Order of the Golden Fleece, 368-369 Rectified American Martinist Order, 780
Order of the Grail, 436 Rectified Scottish Rite, see: Rite Ecossais Rectifié
Order of the Illuminati, 459, 905 Reichshammerbund, 694
Order of the Knights of the Star, 279 Religious Science, 861, 864, 1094
Order of the Manicheans, 1ror9 Religious Technology Center, 1048
Order of the Round Table, 436 Revelation of Christ, 957
Order of the Solar Temple, 853 Ring of Troth, 833
Order of the Star in the East, 172, 686, 1089, Rite Ecossais Rectifié, 256-257, 265-266, 333,
121-1122 386-387, 461-462, 604, 771-772, 777-778,
Ordo Novi Templi, 91, 93-95, 97, 673-675 851-852,934, 1058, II7I-1173
Ordo Rosae Rubeae et Aureae Crucis, 285, Rite Hermétique, 329, 551, 941
547-548,552, 783 Rite of Memphis, 329, 402, 459, 552, 768, 780,
Ordo Rotae et Aureae Crucis, 107 899, 915
Ordo Saturni, 380 Rite of Memphis and Misraim, 402, 459, 552,
Ordo Templi Orientis Antiqua, 906 780, 1089
Ordo Templi Orientis, 108, 282-283, 287, Rite of Misraim, 329, 402, 780, 915, 976
379-381, 402, 459, 487, 692, 743, 830, 853, Romuva, 833
898-906, 966, IT041, 1047, 1089 Rope, The, 447
Ordre de la Rose Croix du Temple, 938 Rosae Rubeae et Aureae Crucis, 285, 547, 552,
Ordre des chevaliers faydits de la Colombe du 783, 1164
Paraclet, 401 Rose+Cross University, 5 5
Ordre des Chevaliers Magons Elus Coens de Rose-Croix Catholique, 915
Univers, see: Elus Coéns ’ Rosicrucian Fellowship, 463-464, 993,
Ordre des Elus Coéns de Josué, see: Elus Coéns IO18—-1020
Ordre du Temple Renové, 442, 852 Royal Order of Tibet, 1142
Ordre Kabbalistique de la Rose Croix, 163, 402, Royal Oriental Order of Sikha, 545
441, 645, 915, 938, 1018, 1063 Rozekruisers Genootschap, 1to19
Ordre Martiniste Synarchique, 402 Rune Gild UK, 833
Ordre Rénové du Temple, 853,
Ordre Sublime des Chevaliers Elus, 341, Sabbatians, 356, 637, 670
851-852 Saint Germain Foundation, 587, 1093-1095
Orphic Circle, 203, 204-205, 206, 1079 Samaritains Inconnus, 402
Osseans, 330 Sampseans, 330
Osho Movement, 576, 578, 1134 Sat B’hai, 545, 1169
Satornilians, 240
Pagan Federation, 831 School for Esoteric Studies, 160
Pagan Front 831 School of the Wisdom, 1122
Pansophic movement, 904 Science of Being, 861, 863
Pansophical Lodge of the Lightseeking Brethren Scientology, 310, 770, 986, 1046-1050, 1143
of the Orient-Berlin, 379 Sethians, 90, 141, 195, 228, 406, 422, 424,
Paracelsus Research Society, 55 429-430, 585, 703, 836, 895, 1063-1069,
Paulicians, 90, 192-193, 758 1146
Pélerins de Salem, 52 Shadhiliyya order, 848
Perates, 406, 429-430, 939-940 Shrine of Wisdom, 541
Philadelphians, 197, 678, 683-684, 709, 963 Simonians, 251, 426, 430, 691, 769, 1046,
Philalethes,54, 73, 200, 238, 345, 3575 5945 1069-1072
603, 777, 802, 865, 1082-1083, 1130, I157 Social Welfare Centre, 1122
Philosophes de la Nature (Dubuis), 56, 239 Sociedade do Graal no Brazil, 437
Philosophical Research Society, 455-456 Societa Alchemica Italiana, 53
Phrenological Society, 658 Societas Rosicruciana in America, 487, 550,
Phréres Simplistes, 438 1018, 1093

--- Page 615 ---
INDEX OF GROUPS AND ORGANIZATIONS II9I
Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia, 215, 388, Tara Center, 160
544-5475 552, 633, 692, 783, 899, 1018, Temple of Set, 630, 1036-1037
1093, 1164, 1169-1170 Temple of Wisdom, 163
Societas Rosicruciana in Civitatibus Foederatis, Théodoxie universelle, 3 54
1018 Theosophical Society in America (Hargrove),
Société Alchimique Frangaise, 53 1120
Société de Harmonie, 280, 1025 Theosophical Society Loyalty League,
Société des Souvenirs et des Etudes Cathares, 827 I121I-1122
Société littéraire des interprétes du livre de Theosophical Society, 3, 52, 82, 89, 132,
Thoth, 343, 111 138-139, 159, 163, 170-172, 179-184, 199,
Société Martines de Pasqually, 931, 933 202-203, 205, 217, 259, 266-267, 285, 300,
Société Spirite, 177-179 309, 329, 345, 378, 388, 400, 436-437, 442,
Society for Enlightening the Bulgarian People’s 444, 455, 458-459, 462-463, 486-487, 541,
Spirit, 309 545-546, 552-557, 588, 630, 633, 664,
Society for printing, publishing and circulating 685-686, 693, 712-714, 783, 785-786, 789,
the Writings, 1105 807, 816, 826, 829, 846, 848, 859, 862, 886,
Society for Promoting the Study of Religions, 888, 894-895, 899, 907, 912-914, 942, 948,
786 966, 978-979, 985, 1018, 1023, 1045-1046,
Society for Psychical Research, 181-182, 458, 1079, 1085, 1087-1089, 1093, 1106,
555, L019, 1080, 1118-1119 III4-1123, 1124, 1133, 1141-1142, 1164,
Society for the Diffusion of Spiritual Knowledge, I169-1170,1179, 1183
203 Therapeutae, 341, 584
Society of Eight, 545 Threshold Society, 849
Society of Magnetism, 658 Thule Society, 96-97, 848
Society of Mother Eve, 957 Traditional Martinist Order, 781-783
Society of Silent Help, 863 Triangles, 158, 160
Society of Silent Unity, 863 Triplicate Order of Rosicrucia, 978
Society of St. Francis, 1035, 1145 Typhonian OTO, 905
Society of the “Rosae Crucis”, 368
Society of the Inner Light, 377 Ultra, 345
Society of the Ros[y] C[ross], 368-369 United Friends, 279
Solazareff movement, 56 United Lodge of Theosophists, 1114, 1120
Sovereign Order of the Temple of Initiation, Unity School of Christianity, 863
1020 Universa! Brotherhood and Theosophical Society,
Spiritualists National Federation, 1080 556, I119-1120
Spiritualists National Union, 1080 Universal Co-Freemasonry, 686
SRIA, see: Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia Universal Philosophic Society, 1112
Stelia Matutina, 549-550, 1091-1093 Universal White Brotherhood, 309
Strict Observance, 257-258, 387, 401, 461, Université Saint Jean de Jerusalem, 271, 273
593-594, 602, 630, 697, 749-750, 851-852, University of Psychical Research, 864
932, EONS, 1055.51 170—-n1 72 Ur, Group of, see: Gruppo di Ur
Sufi Islamia Ruhaniat Society, 847
Sufi Movement, 847 Valentinians, 228, 240, 268, 406-409, 411-412,
Sufi Order, 846-847 414, 417, 420, 422, 426-427, 429-430, 491,
Sufism Reoriented, 847 583, 585, 702, 769, 975, 1064, 1068,
Suhalia, 1046 II 44-1146, 1148-1156
Summit Lighthouse, 268, 588, 1023, Veilleurs, 793, 1046
1093-1096 Vitalis New Templars, 95
Summit University, 1095 Vocational Training Centre for Women, 1122
Swastika Circle, 95
Swedenborg Foundation, 1106, 1109 White Brotherhood, 309-310
Swedenborg Rite, 545, 552, 899, 914, 1107, Wicca, 202, 287, 828-829, 830-831, 834
116 Wilmans Metaphysical College, 864
Seadenbors Scientific Association, 1100 World Goodwill, 158, 160
Swedenborg Society, 1106
Swiss OTO, 905 Yezidis, 704

--- Page 616 ---
jee ‘
3) 4—. ee Tee y ota
a) OL) \OT ah
Ty 11.8 S97 14,99es
YT -. 6). Dull ot Mie (Pe te
A’ 4
“= lavp~rnuil dA 3Rnyar
air orien 1) We Anew
vali y 1. efi ener aly rae
S ul LL laa exon
is bane smd
: : p Abas aol 2) eoeerealsé Sete
— : wT" ¢ 1) ph? SRF
hla) oe maviigyiin vn) evict
ss pee eRe
= ~ <iipartheousdtrids abhiny gill lyney wil pinva@g?
a 45 é 5 alii i peo Cee genl'> oh
= » Gee pein si» 4 enpaber
roe-F i : fj Ane ‘
. ; : = Lippe ae itoketep) |eggs! coh ontiogé
aint pi Tews b gtd ai : ’ goog Ret) ER 6 erste -
ee t jeu? (gems 0/5) Oe ory) ee wat YR ~
gba via tap whait 7) “AOE *
ayatedl © | so taanimae engoae.®
bint =. cate,Fis die venaitea hh >
a 26hit is YS , hil g rie wey rie
de bx a bec To wa 6 Pim ies sg. 400 cabal Oerati2bee eration’.
: ‘ eae a4 euwe : ® $0 Pitas ‘ 2 ° q ve e pee ova! eg 7
i ae oi _ { Art Wet whe TE é fot 2G wmarh ie) a
re - bas! ii) nip, ifm Pee
©Pa ><! ais a’ a Ay 6 Ae 48 @ ae | oes! surat « te ;
= mn a orM, htea Sins) ta! far cw a oe
* deg tel Py a sphSUpsaee ) 5 ; Fund HSER. i JPY Ors
a hen le linptgyd Hh Hee (iirsts «ep gil bs sigur wld a eee
deny wid! Sawn Dabo se Anite é Pxia, oA a
gevebrw vu a be Rit eowve?d\: ite: >, o hgiet seeeel lee
= A= Papa bineendie®! @rew +i ginnydam © ma oesn
cs. saibabiasantellad on tatsaritt Sam 4 Alsfm
tafe% aaadbereestimy td i Ly FS, & , noha, Per aptenny (o) Petpgecehe OeeHees
F - oT) ort 4 Sf
e aecnee aan anya
ve Ph nine er!
> % ea eee ae
hip Cabal oot vont
venae

--- Page 617 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS
Aachen, Hans von, 1021 Ahmad ibn Mustafa al-Alawi, 848
‘Abd Allah Ja‘far al-Sadiq, 27 Aigner, Ludwig, 368
Abder-Rahman Elish el-Kebir, 443 Aigrefeuille, Marquis d’, 941
Abdilaziz, 125 Aivhanov, Omraam Mikhaél, 309-310
Abd-ru-shin, 436-437, 1183 Akembes, 939
Abdul-Hadi, see: Aguéli, John Gustav Aksakov, Aleksandr N., 1081
Abelard, Peter, 123, 479, 501-503, 838 Alan of Lille, 98, 479, 481, 501-502, 504, 511,
Abellio, Raymond, 1-2, 1060-1061, 1074, 1134 838-839, 842
Abraham bar Hiyyah, 122, 638 Alanus ab Insulis, see: Alan of Lille
Abraham ibn Ezra, 122, 125-126, 131, Alawiyya order, 848
134-135,316, 638 Alazonmastix Philalethes, see: More, Henry
Abu Bakr al-Hasan b. al-Khasib, 125 Alban, St., 1023
Abdi ’I-Faradj al-Nadim, see: al-Nadim Albana-Mignaty, Margarita, 1045
Abt Hatim Razi (Aba Hatim Razi), 706 Albertus, Frater, 55, 239
Aba Ma‘shar, Ja‘far b. Muhammad (al-Balkhi), Albertus Magnus, 9-12, 23, 35, 53, 99-100,
I2O-121, 123-126, 131, 133, 479, 513, 516, 123, 127, 133, 157, 276, 289, 296, 316-317,
518-519,521, $30, 946 364, 395, 480-482, 507, 509-512, 523-524,
Abu’l Wefa Mubeschschir ben Fatik, 505 609-610, 726-727, 730, 747, 792; 796,
Abulafia, Abraham, 640, 681, 951 838-839, 927, 946, 1055, 1062, 1138
Achad, Frater, see: Jones, Charles Stansfeld Albiker, Karl, 1181
Achilles, Albrecht, 37 Albohazen Haly, 121, 125
Achillini, Alessandro, 99 Albrecht VII von Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt,
Ackroyd, Peter, 308 Count, 662
Acton, Alfred, 1100 Albubater, see: Aba Bakr al-Hasan b. al-Khasib
Adalbold of Utrecht, sox Albumasar, see: Abu Ma‘shar Ja‘far b.
Adam, Paul, 441, 454 Muhammad
Adamantius, 316, 767 Albuzale, 102
Adami, Tobias, 155, 232-233 Alcabitius, 121, 125, 526
Adams, Camille, 849 Alcher of Clairvaux, 609
Adams, Evangeline, 282 Alciatus, Andreas, 1176
Adams, John, 817 Alcibiades, 330-331
Adamski, George, 1142-1143 Alcmaeon of Croton, 607
Adda,142, 757, 760 Alcuin, 878
Adelard of Bath, 19, 30, 123, 126, 510, 519, Aldobrandini, Cardinal I., see: Clement VIII,
521, 524, 746, 803, 997 Pope
Adelphius, 1065 Alemanno, Yohanan, 641, 681, 952
Adler, Alfred, 573 Alembert, Jean le Rond d’, 132, 738, 822, 885,
Adorno, Theodor W., 448-449 989
AE, 2-4, §55, 1022, 1179 Alessandrini, 359
Aegidius ot Parma, 516 Aletophilus, 539-540
Aelian, 69 Alexander of Abonutheichos, 770
Aelius Promotus, 69 Alexander of Aphrodisias, 99, 843, 962
Aeschylus, ror1 Alexander the Great, 23, 100, III, 114-115,
Affre, Denis-Auguste, 689 476, 514-515,567, 906, 1054
Afzal al-din Kashani, 532 Alexander of Hales, 481, 511
Agaplius, 1065 Alexander I, Tsar, 327, 697
Agathopus, 1147 Alexander the Libyan, 1065
Agethen, Manfred, 592 Alexander Polyhistor, 804
Agricola, Georg, 38, 44 Alexander Trallianus, 69
Agrippa, Heinrich Cornelius, 4-8, 11-12, 47, 44, Alexander VI, Pope, 483
46, 131, 134, 154, 157, 163, 179, 288-291, Alfanus, 19
302, 306, 313, 318, 321, 338, 377, 381, 398, Alfassa, Mirra, 487, 1113
4355 459s 535-536, 538, 540, 570-571, 611, Alfonse d’Avalos, 229
622, 624, 626, 629, 632, 641-642, 644, 647, Alfonso II, last Duke of Ferrara, 936
667, 682, 690, 694, 696, 716, 728, 733-734, Alfonso of Castile, 130
736, 739-740, 7435 745, 788, 797, 813, 842, Alfonso X Sabio, King, 122, 638
852, 879, 885-886, 925, 927, 944, 947; Alfred of Sarashel, 23, 32
979-980, 1057, 1060, 1138, 1158, 1176, Alfredus Anglicus, 32
r180 ‘Ali b. Ridwan, 516
Aguéli, Ivan, 848 Alier, 599
Aguéli, John Gustav, 442-443, 848 Alihad, Alaud, 555
Ahmad al-‘Alawi, Sheikh, 1044 Allan, William Frederick, see: Leo, Alan

--- Page 618 ---
1194 INDEX OF PERSONS
Alleau, René, 54-55, 238 354, 401, 439, 483, 514-515, 517, $21,
Allemann, Fritz, 1041 530-531, 638, 690, 721, 742, 1136
Allen, Michael J.B., 611 Apuleius, 118, 255, 315-316,362, 377, 493,
Allenbach, Charles, 689 500, 533, 719, 721, 744-745, 837, 906
Allendy, R., 882 Aqguilinus, 1065
Alliette, Jean-Baptiste, see: Etteilla Aquinas, Thomas, 9-11, 23, 35-36, 98-99, 123,
Aloisa, Hedwig, 789 223, 314, 360, 364, 395, SIO-SII, 524-525,
Alpetragio, 791, 945 610, 726, 796, 837, 841, 885, 946, 1095,
Alphanus of Salerno, 31 1134, 1137
Alphidius, 40 Aquino, Michael, 287, 1036-1037
Alphonse II, King, 243 Archelaos, 26, 30
Alphonso X the Wise, King, 125, 505, 516 Archer, Timothy, 1157
Alsted, Johann Heinrich, to1, 207, 269 Archinto, F., 971
Alta, Abbé, 441 Archytas of Tarento, 875
Alverny, M.-T. d’, 503 Arcimboldo, Giuseppe, 1021
Amabile, Luigi, 233 Arés, Jacques d’, 390
Amadeo VI, Duke of Savoy, toro Aretino, Pietro, 229
Amadeo, Beato, 392 Argoli, Andrea, 129, 134-135
Amadou, Robert, 238-239, 280, 771-774, Argyropoulos, Johannes, 610
779-777887, 932-933, 935 Ariosto, Ludovico, 229, 936
Amalric of Bene, 336 Aristophanes, 301, I151
Ambelain, Robert, 389, 402, 781-782 Aristotle, 9-10, 17-19, 26-28, 31-32, 34, 37;
Ambrogio, Teseo, 970 42, 45-46, 59, 73, 83, 97-I10I, 109, III, 145,
Ambrose, 335, 877, 906 1§6=157, £66, 207, 210-212, 220-221,
Amelia, Princess (sister of Frederick the Great), 231-232, 234, 240, 254, 276, 292, 316-317,
1023 336, 471-472, 480-481, 484, 506-507, 510,
Amelius, 406, 835, 1065 512-$13, 5IS-S17, 524, 530, 532, 606-608,
Amerio, Romano, 235 610, 641, 688, 705-706, 727, 732, 791, 795,
Amesius, 428 808, 834, 837, 839, 843, 845, 875-876, 885,
Ammontus Saccas, 363 912, 917, 919, 936-937, 945, 950, 960-962,
Anatolius, 876 964, 981, 1008, IOII, 1054, 1062, 1097,
Anaxagoras, 18, 30 TOO, TL28> LIAO enU5os UE
Anaxilaus of Larissa, 721, 724 Aristoxenos, 808
Anaximandros, 18, 30 Arius, 141, 687
Anaximenes, 30 Armentano, Amedeo, 979
al-Andalusi, Sa‘id, 530 Arnau de Vilanova, 23, 35-36, 53, 102-103,
Andernach, Johannes Guintherius von, 918 322, 370, 525, 747, 922, 1007-1008, 1062,
Anders, Richard, 97 1159
Anderson, James, 341, 1130 Arnauld de la Chevalerie, 370-371
Andreae, Jakob, 72 Arndt, Johann, 72, 74, 260, 270, 460, 662, 698,
Andreae, Johann Valentin, 72-75, 155, 270, 733, 873, 930, 956-958,1166
461, 632, 662, 710, 890, 892-893, 956, 958, Arnim, Achim von, 642, 1001-1002
965, I009-1LOIO, 1012-1013, IOI7, 1074, Arnobius of Sicca, 500, 560
1157 Arnold, Edward, 907
Andronicus of Rhodos, 1064 Arnold, Gottfried, 103-105, 219, 261-262, 338,
Angelucci, Teodoro, 1129 433, 709-710, 758, 873, 893, 917, 956-958,
Angelus Silesius, 46, 95, 105, 186, 675, 874 969-970, 1014
Anger, Kenneth, 1036 Arnold, Kenneth, 1140
Angelus, Johannes, 125 Arnold, Matthew, 829-830
Anhalt, Prince August von, 460 Aroux, Eugéne, 298, 359
Anicetus, 240, 1147 Arquati, Antonio, 130
Anne, Queen of England, 865 Arrian, 906
Annunzio, Gabriele d’, 782 Arroyo, Stephen, 140
Anquetil-du Perron, Abraham Hyacinthe, 907, Ars, Curé d’, 947
1183 Arsames, 804
Anselm of Alessandria, 193-194, 243, 245 Arson, Pierre-Joseph, 1179
Anthimus, 1147 Artapanus, 804-805, 961
Antiochus I, King, 115 Artemidorus, 317
Antiochus of Athens, 117 Arundale, George, 172, 1121-1122
Antoine of Lorraine, Duke, 255 Arundale, Rukmini, 172, 1122
Antonia, Princess of Wiirttemberg, 892 Arundell, Isabel, 217
Apelles, 241, 767 Arzakel, 945
Apianus, Petrus, 129 Aschbach, Annemarie, 905
Apollinaire, Guillaume, 8, 249 Aschenden, John, 946
Apollodorus, 211 Asclepiogeneia, psp):
Apollonius of Tyana, 24, 27-28, 94, 216, 274, Ascoli, Cecco d’, 358, ae, 626, 947

--- Page 619 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS T195
Ashburner, John, 1079 Bacon, Francis, 44, 154-156, 157, 372, 456,
Ashmand, J., 132 464, 466, 570-571, 693, 710, 737, 912, 1023
Ashmole, Elias, 43, 47, 105-107, 155-156, 304, Bacon, Roger, 10-12, 19, 35, 44; §351103,. 127,
308, 551, 570-571, 748, 865, 967, 1013 123-124, 127, 156-158, 316, 347, 435, 480,
Ashmole, Simon, 105 506, 524, 571, 590, 726-727, 874, 955, 1023,
Askew, Antoninus, 417 1055, 1062
Assagioli, Roberto, 576 Bacon de la Chevalerie, 333-334, 777, 910, 933,
Assier, Adolphe d’, 894 Rig
Assurbanipal, 115 Bacstrom, Sigismund, 456
Aswynn, Freya, 833 Baeumker, C., 503
Atech, A., 147 Bahrdt, Karl, 341-342
Athanasius, 224 Bahrens, Friedrich, 5 51
Athenagoras, 476 Bahya ben Asher, 687
Atticus, 413 Baif, Jean-Antoine de, 611, 687, 812-813, 883
Atwood, Mary Anne, 13, 52, 541, 553-554, Baifius, J.A., 515
647 Baigent, Michael, 828, 853
Auber, Canon, 882 Bailey, Alice Ann, 138-139, 158-160, 300, 337,
Aubert, Jacques, 919 576, 714, 1023, 1093
Auclerc, Quintus, 250, 988 Bailey, Foster, 158-159
Audius, 141 Baillif, Roch le, 918-919
Augurelli, Aurelio, 48, 320, 435 Bailly, Jean-Sylvain, 76, 250
August II of Braunschweig-Liineburg, Duke, Balbillus, 116
21,0138 Baldini, Bacchio, 483
August of Brunswick, Duke, 74-75, 1017 Baldini, E., 237
Auguste, Philippe, 244 Baldit, M., 626
Augustine (Augustinus of Hippo), 25, 43, 98, Balin, Peter, rr12
142-143, 314, 335, 359-360, 362, 366, 374, Balinas, 24, 27-29, 514, 531
396, 399, 477, 479-483, 493-494, 497, Ballanche, Pierre Simon, 160-162, 354, 712,
500-503, 505-508, 510, 521-522, 524, 561, 778, 986, 1002-1005, 1179
568-570, 609, 618, 620, 649, 659, 681, Ballard, Anne Wheeler, 587
687-688, 720, 725-726, 758-760, 763-764, Ballard, Guy Warren, 587, 1141
792, 803, 810, 813-814, 837, 841, 874, Balmis, A. de, 290
877-878, 890, 953, 1127, 1137, 1162, 1174, Balsamo, Giuseppe, see: Cagliostro, Alessandro
1176 di
Augustus, Emperor, 114, 116, 721-722, 724, Balsamo, Joseph, 357
1138 Balthasar, Hans Urs von, 1111, 1124
Aulus Gellius, 220 Balzac, Honoré de, 265, 334, 778, 1004, 1026,
Aurach, George, 54 1031
Aurelian of Rééme, 810 Bangius, T., 290
Aurelius, Marcus, 607, 617, 1017 Bar Hebraeus, Gregor, 1065
Aurevilly, Barbey d’, 938 Barbara von Cilli, 37
Aurobindo, Sri, 324, 487, 1113 Barbaro, Ermolao, 949
Avalon, Arthur, 346, 348, 785, 908 Barbarossa, Frederick, 243, 964
Avendauth, 143 Barbault, André, 55
Averroes, 60, 98, 157, 232, 398, 839, 843, Barbault, Armand, 55
950-952, 960, 1128 Barberin, Chevalier de, 79
Avicenna, 16, 22-23, 29, 30-32, 59, 100, 102, Barberini, Francesco, 666
125, 143-147, 157, 271, 312, 469, 471, 506, Barberino, Francesco da, 358-360
510, 513, 532, 590, 609-610, 705, 837, 839, Barbot, Théophile, 255
917, 944, 960, 1062, 1174 Bardesanes, 704, 757, 764, 1145
Axionicus, 1145-1146 Bardi, Count Giovanni de’, 812
Aydamor Jaldaki, 531 Bardon, Franz, 381
Ayton, William Alexander, 53, 487 Barhebraeus, see: Ibn al-Tbri
Azam, Eugene, 79 Barlet, Francois-Charles, 133, 138, 162-163,
266, 357, 401, 441, 487, 645, 914, II13
Baader, Benedict Franz Xaver von, 47, 80, Barnaud, Nicolas, 371, 1021
148-154, I91, 260, 264, 322, 327-328, 540, Baronio, Cesare, 497, 1129
543, 605, 613, 643, 661, 823-824, 869, 881, Barrés, Maurice, 441, 914
892, 921, 994, 996, LOOO-1001, 1005-1006, Barrett, Francis, 51, 163-164, 290, 629, 644
1026, 1039-1040, 1042, 1057, 1060, 1130, Barrett, William, 785
T181 Barrow, Isaac, 865-866
Bach, Johann Sebastian, 816 Barth, Karl, 271, 448
Bacharach, Naphtali, 671 Bartholomaeus Anglicus, 3 5
Bachelard, Gaston, 239, 989 Bartholomew of Messina, 316
Bachofen, Johann Jakob, 346, 348 Bartholomew of Parma, 318
Backhouse, William, 106 Bartolocci, Julius, 290

--- Page 620 ---
1196 INDEX OF PERSONS
Barhadbesabba, 196 Benzelius, Eric, 1098
Baruzi, Jean, 271 Berdiaev, Nicholas, 153, 186, 266, 307, 456
Baruzi, Joseph, 271 Bergasse, Nicolas, 603
Basil (Bogomil), 193, 878 Bergerac, Cyrano de, 984
Basil of Caesarea, 335 Bergia, Sarah, 1097
Basilides, 164-168, 426, 429-430, 649, 983, Bergier, Jacques, 389
1071 Bergson, Henri, 548, 783, 822
Basilius Valentinus, 34, 46, 48, 53-55, 238, 322 Bergson, Moina, see: Mathers, Moina
Bassof, Larissa, 806 Berna, Didier, 77
Bassus, T.E.M.EF. von, 595 Bernard, Raymond, 1ro19-1020
Bate de Malines, Henry de, 505 Bernard, Christian, 853, 1019
Bateson, Gregory, 575 Bernard, Claude, 665
Batfroi, Séverin, 55 Bernard, Jean-Jacques, 265, 665
Bathurst, Anne, 967 Bernard Silvester, 123, 126, 169, 479, 502, 504,
Batory, Stephan, 303 623, 803, 838, 1069
al-Battani, Aba ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Berndt, Margarete, 380
Gabir, 120, 125, 945 Bernhard von der Mark, 34
Baud de Nans, Claude Etienne le, 597 Bernhardt, Alexander, 437
Baudelaire, Charles, 249, 265, 613, 691, Bernhardt, Claudia-Maria, 437
IOOI-I002 Bernhardt, Elizabeth, 437
Bauer, Marie, 456 Bernhardt, Irmgard, 437
Baur, Ferdinand Christian, 338, 633, 758 Bernhardt, Marga, 437
Bayard, J.P., 1161 Bernhardt, Oskar Ernst, see: Abd-ru-shin
Bayle, Pierre, 8, 293 Bernhardt, Siegfried, 437-438
Béatrice, Guy, 55 Bernier, Fran¢ois, 907
Beauharnais, Fanny de, 987 Bernoulli, Rudolf, ro41
Beaumarchais, Pierre Augustin Caron de, 987 Bernt, Philomena, 789
Beaumont, W.C., 714 Bernus, Alexander von, 54, 921
Bebot, Jean, 317 Béroalde de Verville, 371
Becher, Johann Joachim, 44-45 Beroalde, Matthieu, 1129
Becker, Christian August, 54 Berosus, 112, I15
Beda Venerabilis, 122, 315, 1138 Berridge, Edward W., 548-549
Bédarride Brothers, 329, 768 Berry, Mary E, 863
Beedles, Rebekah, 1157 Bert, Paul, 665
Beer, Peter, 642 Berthold of Moosburg, 98, 481-482, 509-513,
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 660, 815-816 838, 840, 842
Begley, W., 882 Bertiaux, Michael, 906
Beguin,J., 49 Bertoli, Annina, 309
Behem, Abraham, 188 Bertram of Ahlen, 512
Behm, Albrecht, 1097 Bertrand, A.J.F, 162
Behm, Sarah, 1097 Besant, Annie, 95, 159, 170-173, 182, 199, 342,
Bekker, Balthasar, 854, 1177 388, 458, 554, 556-557, 685-686, 714, 785,
Béla IV, King, 194 789, 830, 908, 912, 943, 966, 1023,
Belenus, 480, 514, 517, 520-522, 524 1089-1090,III4, I119-I122
Béliard, Octave, 436 Besant, Arthur Digby, 170
Belibasta, Guillaume, 246 Besant, Frank, 170
Bell, George, 854 Besant, Mabel, 170
Bellanti, Lucio, 134 Besant-Scott, Mabel Emily, 830
Bellarmino, Roberto, 208, 399 Besold, Christoph, roo9
Bellchambers, Jeanne, 162 Bessarion, Cardinal Johannes, 489, 841
Belot, Jean, 800 Beswick, Samuel, 1107
Bembo, Pietro, 4, 229, 397 Betanelly, Michael, 180
Benci, Tommaso, 360 Betanzos, Ramon, 153
Benedict XII, Pope, 244 Betke, Joachim, 957
Benevento, Baruch di, 397 Betti, Mario, 782
Bengel, Johann Albrecht, 47, 455, 890-893, Beurrier, Paul, 539
956 Bevilacqua, Simone, 64-65, 67, 135
Benivieni, Girolamo, 950 Beyer, Gabriel A., 1097
Benjamin, Elbert, see: Zain, C.C. Beyerland, Abraham Willemsz van, 537, 539
Benn, Gottfried, 346 Beza, Theodore, 1129
Bennett, Allan, 281-282, 907 Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, 576, 770, 1134
Bennett, John G., 453, 848 Biagio da Cremona, 129
Benoist, Luc, 888 Bianchini, Giovanni, 128, 132, 135
Benson, Robert Hugh, 579, 785 Bidez, J., 112, 116, 719, 1065
Bentley, Richard, 293 Biebel, Bernard, 55
Benz, Ernst, 715, 1140 Bignami-Odier, Jeanne, 1008

--- Page 621 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS I197
Bignon, Abbé Jean Paul, 1098 Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus, 122, 126,
Bilfinger, Georg Bernhard, 890, 1100 BOs 466, SOl, 593, 506, 610-61 qT, 670, 721,
Billingsley, Henry, 302 810, 812-814, 837, 878-879
Bimstein, Louis Maximilian, see: Théon, Max Boheman, Karl A.A., 108
Binda, Michel, 55 Bohm, David, 825, 1134
Binsfeld, Peter, 1177 Boileau, M., 551
Biondo, Francesco, 395 Boirac, Emile, 79
Biringuccio, Vannoccio, 38, 44 Bois, Jules, 579, 1035
Birkholz, A.M., see: Booz, AdaMah Boisset, Yves-Fred, 781
al-Birtini, 120, 125 Bolen, Jean Shinoda, 654
Bischoffswerder, Johann Rudolf von, 965, Boll, E, 117, 882
IOI6—-1017 Bolos of Mendes, 16, 22-25, 719, 723
al-Bitruji, 126 Bombast von Hohenheim, Wilhelm, 922
Black, Joseph, 45 Bomberg, Daniel, 970-971
Blackden, Marcus Worsley, 548, 550 Bonald, Louis de, 161, 348
Blackwell, Anna, 1079 Bonatti, Guido, 126-127, 130
Blainville, 599 Bonatus, see: Bonatti, Guido
Blake, Robert, 173 Bonaventura, 481, 1054
Blake, William, 173-177, 215, 265, 307, 614, Bonaventura da Bagnoregio, 511
825, 829, 845, 870, 908, 1001-1002, 1004, Bond, EB., 882
1180 Bondeli, Julie, 665
Blanchard, Victor, 402, 781 Bonfius, Luca, 398
Blavatsky, Helena Petrovna, 2-3, 52, 85, 91, 93, Bongiovanni, Giorgio, 1143
95, 159-160, 163, 171-172, 177-185, 199, Bongo, Pietro, 880
205, 266-267, 300, 309, 329, 338, 342, 347; Bonifatius VIII, Pope, 102, 296
388, 455, 458-459, 546, 552-557, 588, Bonincontri, Lorenzo, 129, 134
644-648, 664, 674-675, 685, 693, 713-714, Bonner, Campbell, 70
742, 783, 785-786, 789, 846, 886-887, 894, Bonnet, Charles, 279, 709, 712, 985
898, 907, 912, 942, 948, 966, 978-979, 985, Bonneville, Nicolas de, 601, 988
1023, 1045, 1057, 1078-1079, 1088, 1107, Bonus, John, 663
¥EE4<1122, 1132, L14Ty lLETOpeIIO Bonus, Petrus, 3 5-36, 682
Blavatsky, Nikofor, 177 Booz, AdaMah, 1o16, 1168
Blessig, Emile, 1032 Borel, Jean, 435
Blessington, Marguerite, Countess of, 214-215 Borella, Jean, 819, 1134
Bleuler, Eugen, 648, 1041 Born, Ignaz von, 108
Block, Marguerite Beck, 202 Borrichius, Olaus, 15, 537-538
Bloy, Léon,579, 938 Bostius, Arnold, 1136, 1138
Blumenthal, Morton, 248, 608 Bostock, R., 920
Bly, Robert, 654 Botal, Leonardo, 435
Boas de Jouvenel, Claire, 1113 Botticelli, Sandro, 483
Boas, Marie, 15 Boudet, Amélie, 658
Boas, Simon, 3 56-357 Bougainville, Louis Antoine de, 940
Boas, Tobias, 356 Boulainvillier, Henri de, 131
Boccaccio, Giovanni, 169, 229, 798 Boulanger, Nicolas-Antoine, 1025
Boccalini, Trajano, 73, 1009 Boullan, Joseph-Antoine, 441-442, 579-580
Bockler, Heinrich, 392 Boully, Monny de, 439
Bode, Johann J.C., 132, 592, 594-596 Bourbon, Louise-Henriette de, 909
Bodenstein, Adam von, 320, 919 Bourdelle, Emile-Antoine, 938
Bodier, T., 135 Bourignon, Antoinette, 196-198, 261, 601, 963
Bodin, Jean, 710, 1176 Bourrée de Corberon, Marie-Daniel, 51, 605
Boé Sylvius, Franciscus de le, 921, 930 Bouvet, Joachim, 484, 539
Boecklin, Charlotte de, 1025 Bovelles, Charles de, 435, 879, 1136, 1138
Boehme, Jacob, 46-47, 51-52, 85, 95, 104-105, Bowen, P.G., 557
148-149, 152-153, 161-162, 174-175, Bowen, Robert, 557
185-192, 198, 219, 260-267, 271, 277, Bowyer, Anne, 105
321-322, 326-327, 338, 351, 393-394, 433, Bo Yin Ra, 21, 198-199, 789, 1042
441, 454-455, 457s 459s 464-465, 537 5435 Boyle, Francis, 199-200
553, 600, 602, 604-605, 613, 626, 642, 644, Boyle, Richard, 199
648-649, 651, 662, 665-666, 675, 677-679, Boyle, Robert, 15, 43-45, 48, 199-201, 339,
684, 697-698, 700, 702, 709, 712, 778, 802, 802-803, 865, 1082-1083
807, 824, 854, 869-870, 873, 890, 892, 921, Boys des Guays, Jacques Francois Etienne le,
930, 957-958, 963, 970, 973-974, 993, 996, 201-202, 1106
IO000-1002, 1006, IOII, IO19, 1025-1027, Bracciolini, Poggio, 130
1029-1030, 1033, 1039-1040, 1042, 1060, Bracesco, Giovanni, 320, 435
1073, lOS7 ZO pL LOT, ebay l LOD Bradlaugh, Charles, 170
Boerhaave, Herman, 44-45, 551 Bradwardine, Thomas, 481-482, 508-513

--- Page 622 ---
1198 INDEX OF PERSONS
Brahe, Tycho, 129-131, 134, 669, 1021 Buddeus, Johann Franciscus, 262
Braid, James, 78-79 Budge, Wallis, 647
Brandis, Alma von, 463 Buffon, Georges-Louis de, 822-823, 988
Brandler-Pracht, Karl, 138 Bugni, Chiara, 395
Brant, Sebastian, 37 Bulcasis, 917
Breckling, Friedrich, 392-393, 957 Bullinger, E.W., 882
Breeze, William, 905 Bullock, Percy, 548
Brenon, Anne, 243 Bultmann, Rudolf Karl, 633
Brentano, Bettina, roo2 Bulwer, William Earle, 213
Brentano, Clemens, 642, 1002 Bulwer-Lytton, Edward George, 204, 213-217,
Brentano, Franz, 1084, 1088 250, 551, 629-630, 633, 690, 701, 977,
Breton, André, 54, 238, 438, 444, 450, 1063 1023-1024,1031, 1079
Breuer, Josef, 1085 Bulwer-Lytton, Edward Robert, 217, 1031
Breyer, Jacques, 853 Bulwer-Lytton, Emily, 214
Breymayer, Reinhard, 321, 368, 597 Bunsen, Christian Carl Josias de, 204
Bricaud, Jean, 402, 780-782 Bunsen, Ernest Christian Louis de, 204-205, 342
Bricaud, Joanny, 402, 900-901 Buondelmonti, Cristoforo, 797
Brice, Edmund, 967 Burchard of Worms, 1175
Briconnet Junior, Guillaume, 687 Burckhardt, Titus, 444, 542, 709, 1043, 1133
Brini, Mirella, 339 Burdach, Karl Friedrich, 80, 823-824
Brion, Charles Abbé de, 891 Burgoyne, Thomas Henry, 486-487, 1112
Britten, Emma (Floyd) Hardinge, 202-206, Burkmar, Lucius, 862
1077-1080 Burnet, Gilbert, 201
Britten, William G.P., 203 Burnet, Thomas, 1098, 1129
Broca, Paul, 79 Burnett, Charles, 10, 123, 126
Brockdorff, Sophie, Countess, 1087 Burnier, Radha, 1122
Brod, Max, 789 Burnouf, Eugéne, 907
Brodie-Innes, John William, 548-550, 784, 1092 Burrows, Herbert, 171
Broek, Roelof van den, 541 Burton, Richard Francis, 204, 217-218, 538,
Bromley, Thomas, 149, 967, 969, 1026 646
Brook, Peter, 450, 453 Burtschell, Nikolaus, 55
Brooke, John L., 47 Bury, Henry Pullen, 548
Brooks, Nona, 863 Butler, John, 308, 473, 1179
Brosses, Charles de, 280 Butor, Michel, 54
Brotz, Robert H., 95, 675 Butte, Wilhelm, 823
Broughton, Luke Dennis, 138 Buttlar, Eva von, 957
Brown, H.A., 714 Butts, Robert F., 997-998
Brown, John Epes, 444 Butts, Thomas, 174
Browne, Thomas, 538, 670 Byron, George Gordon, Lord, 132, 176, 214,
Bruce, James, 418 352, 829, 1000
Bruchié, Miss, 598
Brucker, J. Jakob, 262-263, 338, 539, 551, 643, Cabaeo, Niccolo, 667
845 Cadiot, Noémie, see: Vignon, Claude
Bruckner, Anton, 1085 Caesar, Julius, 116, 831, 1017
Brueghel, Jan, 1021 Caetani, Leone, 359, 671
Bruhl, Count of, 321 Cage, John, 817
Brumore, 597-599 Cagliostro, Alessandro di, 46, 51, 162, 215,
Brun, Charles le, 317 225-227, 250, 326, 329, 356-357, 433, 552,
Brunelli, Francesco, 108, 782 603, 666, 676, 782, 881, 949, 979, 988,
Bruni, Leonardo, 360, 841 1023
Bruno, Giordano (Filippo), 198, 206-213, 232, Cahagnet, Louis-Alphonse, 1080
271, 303-304, 306, 313, 339, 366, 439, 467, Cailhava, Jean-Francois, 987
535-536, 542, 626, 644, 668, 678, 694, 696, Caillet, Serge, 776, 933, 935, 948-949
708, 733, 7355 799, 844, 869, 879, 965, Caithness, Lady Marie Countess of, 401, 553,
984-985, 1021, 1034, 1039, 1087-1088, 826, 1045, I118-1120
I126 Calcidius, 803, 810, 837, 878
Brunschwig, Hieronymus, 38, 44 Calenzio, Elisio, 679
Brunton, Paul, 908 Calid filius Jazichi, see: Khalid ibn Yazid
Bruyez, René, 1046 Callippus, 945
Bry, Theodore de, 748, 814 Callixtus, 331, 430
Buber, Martin, 575, 785 Calonymos, Calo, 397
Bucer, Martin, 921 Calvet, Esprit, 599
Bucher, Caspar, 73 Calvin, Jean, 130, 460, 1176
Buck, J.D., 487 Cambriel, L.P.F, 52
Buckland, Raymond, 831 Camerarius, Joachim, 130, 134
Buddecke, Werner, 394 Camerer, Elias, 890

--- Page 623 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS I199
Camillo, Giulio, 229-230, 399, 798 Cayce, Hugh Lynn, 247
Campanella, Tommaso, 131-132, 134-135, 155, Cazotte, Jacques, 249-251, 778, 854, 988
231-237, 612, 710, 733, 737s 799, 812, 965, Cellier, Léon, 351, 354
O72 Celsus, 166, 240, 896, 922
Campano, Giovanni Antonio (Giannantonio), Celtis, Conrad, 1135
679 Cerdo, 240, 251-252, 430
Campanus of Novara, 121, 131 Cerinthus, 252-254, 429-430
Campbell, Colin, 858, 1107 Cerneau, Joseph, 899
Campbell, John, 339, 654, 1047 Certeau, Michel de, 818
Campbell,Joseph, 339, 654, 1047 Certl, Hedwig Aloisa, 789
Campe, Joachim Heinrich, 591 Chaboseau, A., 487, 780-781
Campeggi, Lorenzo, 6 Chacornac, Paul, 133, 322, 442-443, 673
Campion, Nicholas, 140 Chaeremon, 488
Candidus, 1146 Chaix de Sourcesol, 599
Canseliet, Eugéne Léon, 54-56, 237-240, Chamberlain, Houston Stewart, 310
389-390 Chambers, John D., 541
Canteins, J., 359 Chamfort, Nicolas-Sébastien, 250
Canz, Israel Gottlieb, 889 Champagne, Jean Julien, 54, 238, 249, 389-390
Capparelli, V., 882 Champier, Symphorien, 254-255, 376, 535, 680,
Cappelanus, Andreas, 610 887, 944, 947, 1128-1129
Cappelli, Ottavio, 599 Champoléon, G.A. de, 932-933
Cappuyns, Maieul, 336 Champollion, Jean Francois, 668
Capra, Fritjof, 324, 825 Champrenaud, Léon, 401
Capua, Andrea da, 395 Chamuel, Lucien, 402, 914, 1063
Capua, Matteo di, 679 Chapuys, Eustache, 6
Caracciolo, Gian Galeazzo, 206 Charbonneau-Lassay, Louis, 255-256, 819
Caracciolo, Sebastiano, 782 Charcot, Jean-Martin, 79, 894, 914
Carafa, 396, 398 Charemon, 568
Caramuel y Lobkowitz, Juan, 1138 Charisius, 493
Cardano, Girolamo, 60, 130-131, 133-135, Charlemagne, 122-123, 692, 707, 1138
154, 364, 1009 Charles I, King, 372, 571
Cardini, Franco, 436 Charles II, King, 106, 865, 967
Carl, Johann Samuel, 958-959 Charles III, Duke of Savoy, 5
Carlostadius, 129-130, 135 Charles_V, King, 6, 37, 129,-1024, 1936, 1163
Carneades, 112, 114 Charles VIII, King, 129
Caro, Roger, 55, 129 Charles XII, King, 1098-1099
Caron, Louis le, 1129 Charles of Bourbon, 5
Carpocrates, 240-242, 430 Charles of Lorraine, 372
Carter, Charles, 139 Charles the Bald, 334
Carus, Carl Gustav, 264, 648-649, 823, 825, Charles-August of Weimar, Duke, 1o15
1005, 1043 Charleton, Walter, 885
Casaubon, Isaac, 292, 484, 497-498, 537-538, Charon, Jean, 825
802 Charpentier, Julie von, 869
Casaubon, Meric, 307 Chartres, Duke of, 357
Case, Paul Foster, 1018 Chastanier, Bénédict, 1106-1107
Casmann, Otto, 612 Chastellan, Jean, 435
Cassini, Samuel de, 1176 Chateaubriand, Francois-René de, 778
Cassiodorus, 126 Chatel, Ferdinand-Frangois, 355, 976
Castel, William, 1103 Chatterji, Mohini, 555-556
Castellesi, Adriano, 391 Chaucer, Geoffrey, 41
Castell-Rehweiler, L.F., 368-369 Chauvel de Chauvigny, Marie, 826
Castelnau, Michel de, 207 Chauvet, Auguste-Edouard, 266, 436
Catherine II (the Great), Empress 322, 357, 697, Chauvet, James, 436
871-872, 1026 Chelsea Quinn, Yarbro, 1024
Catherine of Aragon, 397 Chenavard, Paul-Joseph, 673
Catilinet, Jean, 4 Chenephres, 804
Cattan, Christophe de, 318 Chevallier, Marjolaine, 963
Catti, Angelo, 129 Chevillon, Constant, 402, 781, 1133
Caudron, Mr., 202 Child, Robert, 1157
Cavalcanti, Guido, 296, 358-359 Chintamon, Hurrychund, 1115
Cavalieri, Bonaventura, 131 Chmakov, Vladimir, 1123-1124
Cavendish, Henry, 45 Choiseul, Etienne Francois, Duc de, 1022, 1024
Cavendish, Richard, 304 Choisnard, Paul, 133, 136, 139
Caxton, William, 534 Chomiakoy, Alexei S., 699
Cayce, Edgar, 247-249, 300, 343, 702, 714, Chopinel, Jean, see: Meun, Jean de
1134 Chopra, Deepak, 860

--- Page 624 ---
1200 INDEX OF PERSONS
Christian August, Count Palatine of Sulzbach, Comi, Girolamo, 345
464-465,670, 957 Compagni, Dino, 358-359
Christian, Paul, 1111 Condorcet, Antoine-Nicolas, 250
Christian of Anhalt, 965 Confucius, 539, 710
Christian VIII, King of Denmark, 604 Conring, Hermann, 537-538
Chrysippus, 617 Constant, Alphonse Louis, see: Lévi, Eliphas
Chulkov, Vasilij, 873 Constant, Benjamin, 1003
Churchward, James, 702 Constantine the Great, 117, 141, 493, 552
Cicero, 112, 116, 229, 313-314, 476-477, 687, Constantinus Africanus, 31, 879
703, 787, 795, 798, 810, 1064, 1138 Constantius, Emperor, 89
Cione di ser Bernardo, 246 Constanzo, Marchese di, 591
Ciruelo, Pedro, 134 Contarini, Gasparo, 396, 399, 936
Clairvaux, Bernard of, 93, 953 Conway, Viscountess Anne, 464, 466-467, 984
Claudius, Emperor, 1070 Cook, Florence, 179, 1076
Clave, Etienne de, 43 Cook, John, 1112
Clavel, E-T.-B., 976 Coomaraswamy, Ananda K., 444, 709, 714, 785,
Clément de Saint-Marcq, George Le, 900 908-909,1044, 1132-1133
Clement of Alexandria, 103, 164-167, 168, 220, Cooper, Henry, 785
227, 240-242, 268-269, 336, 405, 411-412, Cooper, James Fenimore, 177
ANT AQ2 AZO NA S85 568,008, (6975570355797 Cooper, John, 132
806, 867-868, 877, 895, 906, 939, 974-975, Cooper, Laura Mary, see: Mead, Laura Mary
983, 1072, 1146-1148, I1§5O-1152, 1154 Cooper-Oakley, Isabel, 785, 979, 1023
Clement of Rome, 406 Copeland, Kenneth, 1094
Clement IV, Pope, 10, 156 Copenhaver, Brian P., 100, 254, 477-478, 541,
Clement V, Pope, 102, 257, 849 887, 951, 1013
Clement VII, Pope, 397, 1163 Copernicus, Nicolaus, 129, 131, 208, 669, 708
Clement VIII, Pope, 936 Coq, Albert le, 446, 758
Clement XIV, Pope, 1017 Corbeil, Gilles de, 316
Clement XV, see: Colin, Michel Corberon, Baron de, 605, 988
Clerc, jean ley 293 Corbin, Henri, 145-146, 267, 271-273, 337,
Clermont, Comte de, 850 339, 359, 440, 445, 531-532, 615, 705, ITT,
Clichthove, Josse, 688, 879 1134
Clodius, Frederick, 200 Corbu, Noel, 828
Clowes, John, 1105 Cordier, 987
Clulee, Nicholas, 306 Cordubensis, Andreas, 525
Clusius, Carolus, ro21 Correggio, Antonio da, 273
Clymer, Reuben Swinburne, 402, 781, 1018 Correggio, Giovanni da, 273-275, 534-535;
Coats, John S., 1122 680-682, 1128, 1136
Cobb, John Storer, 1116 Corson, Hiram, 179
Cobenzl, J.P., 592 Cort, M. Christian de, 197
Cockburn, John, 197 Cortese, 396
Cockren, Archibald, 54-55 Cosmas, 192
Cocles, Bartholomaeus, 316-318 Cossé-Brissac, Louis Hercule Timoléon de,
Codreanu, Corneliu, 346 354-355
Cohen Herreras, Abraham, 671 Costa ben Luca, 610
Colazza, Giovanni, 1038-1039 Costet de Mascheville, Albert-Raymond, 780
Colberg, Ehregott Daniel, 47, 262, 338, 538, Costet de Mascheville, Léo, see: Sevananda, Sri
551 Cotton, Robert, 307
Colbert, Jean-Baptiste, 132 Coues, Elliott, 184, 487
Coleman, William Emmette, 183-184 Couliano, Ioan Petru, 607
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 614-615, 829, 844, Coulomb, Alexis, 178, 181-182, 1118
IOQO0-I00T, 1005 Coulomb, Emma, 181, 1118
Colet, John, 4 Couperin, Francois, 816
Colin, Michel, 1143 Couplet, Philippe, 539
Colle, Giovan Vincenzo, 206 Cour, Paul le, 238, 390
Collin de Plancy, Jacques Albin Simon, 854 Courriére, Berthe, 579
Collins, Mabel, 182, 556, 647, 1085, 1089 Court de Gébelin, Antoine, 279-281, 329, 344,
Colocci, Angelo, 680 551, 645, 854, LILO, 1131
Colocci, Francesco, 680 Crabtree, Adam, 81
Colon, Jenny, 854 Cradock, Samuel, 291
Colonna, Franceesco, 391, 434-435, 689 Cramer, Hendrik, 439
Colum, Padraic, 556 Cramer, Malinda E., 863
Columbus, Christopher, 233, 955 Craven sBs, 635
Combas, Pierre de, 1 Craven, William G., 952-953
Comenius, Jan Amos, 261, 269-271, 671, 710, Creilung, J.C., 47
799, 822, 1014 Creutzer, Friedrich, 1003

--- Page 625 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS I201
Crinito, Pietro, 1127 David, Moses, 356, 362
Crisp, Dr. 683 David-Neel, Alexandra, 907
Critodemus, 117 Davidson, Harriet, 1092
Croce, Benedetto, 346 Davidson, Peter, 486-487, 1112-1113
Crociata, Mariano, 1129 Davidson, William, 880
Croix, Marquise de la, 249, 357, 1023 Davis, Andrew Jackson, 81, 299-301, 458, 629,
Croke, Richard, 397 862, 1076-1079
Croll, Oswald, 613, 916, 892, 1021 Davis, Gladys, 248
Cromwell, Oliver, 292, 570, 1016 Davy, Humprey, 824
Croke, Richard, 397 Dayananda Sarasvati, Svami, 1115
Crookes, William, 789, 1076 Déat, Marcel, 1
Crosbie, Robert, 1120 Debus, Allen G., 435
Crowe, Catherine, 80, 540, 613, 632, 661 Debussy, Claude, 816
Crowley, Aleister, 278, 281-287, 308, 348, Decker, Ronald, 343
378-382, 402, 436, 548-549, 630, 644, Dee, Arthur, 106
646-647, 672, 692, 714, 742-743, 784, Dee, John, 48, 117, f21, 1245 129, 157, 282;
829-830, 853, 901-907, 943, 966, 1020, 284, 288, 301-309, 321, 339, 375, 484, 538,
1036, 1047, 1089, IILLI-III2, 1134, L169 625, 645, 647, 662, 733, 735, 742-7435 790,
Csoma de Korés, Alexander, 907 879-880, 965, IOLO, L012, 1022, 1138
Cubiéres, 987 Deghaye, Pierre, 259
Cudworth, Ralph, 291-293, 329, 376, 538, 642, Delaage, Henri, 780, 914
801, 844 Delatte, Armand, 319, 875
Culpeper Alice, 570 Delécluze, Etienne Jean, 359
Culpeper, Nicholas, 570 Deleuze, J.P.F., 79, 162
Culver, Roger, 140 Delgorukova, Helena Pavlovna, 177
Culverwell, Nathaniel, 291 Délicieux, Bernard, 696
Cumont, Franz, 112, 116-117, 719, 762, 1065 Delisle de Sales, Jean Baptiste Claude, 350
Cureau de la Chambre, Martin, 317 Deloncle, Eugéne, 1
Cusa, Nicholas of, 293-296, 396, 482, 499-500, Delp, Mark, 504
505, 510-511, 671, 688, 707, 746, 841, 854, Delrio, Martin, 1177
972, 1087, 1135, 1165 Delville, Jean, 938
Cutting, Emma, see: Coulomb, Alexis Demetz, Frédéric, 1031
Cyliani,51, 54, 390 Democritos, 16, 18-19, 22-24, 26-29, 708, 719,
Cyprian, 877, 1138 7 2S
Cyril of Alexandria, 476, 478, 489, 493, Demostratus, 1065
497-498,560, 568-569, 961, 1008 Denarnaud, Marie, 827-828
Czartorisky, Adam, 357 Denis, Ferdinand, 690
Czepko, Daniel, 957 Denis, Léon, 400
Czepl, Theodor, 97 Denley, John, 163
Descartes, René, 132, 292, 333, 465-466, 802,
Dalai Lama, 14th, 908 866, 885, 963, 1013, 1097-1100
Dalberg, Carl Theodor von, 591-592 Détré, Charles, see: Téder, Charles
Dalberg, Johann Friedrich Hugo von, 816, 907 Deunov, Peter Konstantinov, 309-310
Dalcroze, Jacques, 446, 816 Deveney, John Patrick, 630
Dalton, John, 45 Devi, Srimati Rukmini, 1122
Dalton, Thomas Henry, see: Burgoyne, Thomas Devismes, A.P.J., 329
Henry Devoucoux, Jean-Sébastien, 1133
Damascenus, Johannes, 608 Diaghilev, Serge, 447
Damascius, 836, 876 Dick, Frederick J., 556
Daniélou, Alain, 908 Dickens, Charles, 80, 214, 449
Danko, John, 125 Dickson, George, 548
Danon, M., 290 Diderot, Denis, 132, 263, 614, 738, 822, 885,
Dante Alighieri, 37, 169, 176, 191, 296-299, 989, 1178
357-3593995 791, 796, IOIO Didier, Alexis, 78, 80-81
Darby, John Nelson, 281 Didymus the Blind, 493, 568-569, 758
Dareios, 804 Dietrichstein, Johann Baptist Karl, 108, 1016
Darwin, Charles, 709, 713 Digby, Kenelm, 200
Darwin, Erasmus, 173 Digges, Leonard, 129
Das, Bhagavan, 171 Digges, William, 304
Dashwood, Francis, 103 5 Dina, Marie, 443
Dastin, John, 1062 Dini, Piero, 131
Dasypodius, 131, 134 Dinter, Arthur, 310-311
Daumal, René, 438-441,444, 447 Dinter-Hoffmann, Berta, 310
Davenport Brothers, 1076 Dio Chrysostomus, 1126
Davenport, Ira, 1076 Diocletian, 21, 493, 1184
David of Dinant, 839 Diodorus Siculus, 165, 483, 906, 1128

--- Page 626 ---
I202 INDEX OF PERSONS
Diogenes Laertius, 167, 1126 Durand, Gilbert, 243, 652, 1134
Dionysius Areopagita (Pseudo-), 9-10, 85, 91, Diirckheim, Karlfried, 323-325, 346
219, 222-224, 294-295, 312-313, 315, Durer, Albrecht, 129, 1021
334-3355 361, 363, 439, 471, $03, 507, 610, Durkheim, Emil, 716-717
619, 624, 687-688, 706, 708, 837-839, 841, Duroy d’Hauterive, Jean-Jacques, 250, 603, 778
878, 969, 975 Durrell, Lawrence, 827
Dionysius of Alexandria, 253 Duru, Mme, 442
Dionysius of Athens, 312 Durutte, Camille, 1179
Dioscorides, 69, 469, 918, 945 Dury, John, 1ror3
Dioscoros, 26 Dutoit-Membrini, Jean-Philippe, 264, 322,
Dippel, Johann Conrad, 433, 551, 890, 958-959 325-326,603, 605, 9II
Disraeli, Benjamin, 214-215 Duveen, Denis I., 368
Ditfurth, Franz D. von, 592-594 Dwyer, Arthur, 556
Divisch, Prokop, 79, 822, 886, 891-892
Divoire, Fernand, 1046 Eberhard of Wurttemburg, Count, 990
Divonne, Louis de, 665 Eckartshausen, Karl von, 51-52, 199, 264, 267,
Dobbs, Betty Jo Teeter, 339 322, 326-328, 600, 603, 665, 676, 697-699,
Dodd, Alfred, 155, 490, 561, 568 709, 869, 880, 1000, 1026
Dodge, Silone, 300, 760, 983 Eckbert of Sch6nau, 242-243, 246
Does, Marthe van der, 197 Ecker und Eckhoffen, Hans Heinrich von, 107,
Doinel, Jules, 163, 401-402, 826-827, 900 226, 604, IOIL5
Dolgorukoy, Paul Vassilyevich, 179 Eckhardt J.D.A., ro16
Dominicus Gundisalinus, 21 Eckhart, Meister, 95, 149, 151, 312, 323, 345,
Domitian, 721 347, 451, SII, 601, 651, 675, 817, 840, 908,
Donne, John, 984 1042, 1087, 1165, 1181
Donnelly, Ignatius, 714 Eckstein, Ferdinand d’, 1003
Donnini, Alphonso, 669 Eckstein, Friedrich, 1085
Donop, Baron de, 356 Eckstein, Fritz, 798
Doort, Paul van der, 662 Eco, Umberto, 299, 306, 308, 662, 1058-1059
Dorat, Jean, 687, 883 Eddy, Horatio, 179, 1076
Dorn, Gérard, 260, 320-321, 435, 5375 651, Eddy, Mary Baker, 862-863
880, 918, L012, 1074, 1138 Eddy, William, 179, 1076
Dorner, Isaak August, 892 Edison, Thomas A., 1115
Dorotheos, 117, 122, 124-125 Edmonds, Judge, 458
Dositheus, 428, 633, 1066, 1072 Edward I, King, 1016
Dottini, Miss, 599 Edward III, King, 632
Doubleday, Abner, 1116, 1119 Edward VI, King, 302
Douzetemps, Melchior, 262, 321-323, 325 Edward VII, King, 948
Dower, William, 1120 Efferarius Monachus, 370
Dowson, Edward, 555 Egli, Raphael, 207
Drach, Chevalier, 645 Eibeschiitz, Jonathan, 356
Drummond, William, 632 Eichendorff, Joseph von, 1002
Drumont, Edouard, 356 Eirenaeus Philalethes, see: George Starkey
Du Roy d’Hauterive, J.-Jacques, 778, 932-933, Eisenmenger, Johann Andreas, see: Siderocrates
L172 Eisler, Robert, 786
Dubois, Jean-Antoine, 907 Ekphantos, 30
Dubois, Frédéric (d’Amiens), 77-78 Eleazar of Worms, 639-640, 681
Dubois, Genevieve, 390 Eliade, Mircea, 271, 337, 339, 346-347, 383,
Dubuis, Jean, 56, 239 444-445,652, 1058, 1134
Ducane Womans Eliot JES. aay, Gans
Duchesne, Joseph, 460, 919-920 Elisabeth Charlotte of Orléans, 984
DuClo, Gaston, 13, 43 Elisabeth of Schonau, 688
Dugdale, Elizabeth, 106 Elisha ben Avuya, 634
Dugdale, William, 106 Elizabeth I, 45, 117, 154, 207, 301-302, 304,
Dujols, Pierre, 390 375, 484, 965
Dukes, Paul, 446 Elizabeth of the Palatinate, 465
Dumas, Alexandre, 344, 778 Elliotson, John, 78
Dunlop, Daniel Nicol, 556 Ellis, Edwin, 1180
Duplessis de Mornay, Philippe, 376 Ellwood, Robert S., 588, 846, 1142-1143
Dupont de Nemours, 988 Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 539-540, 907
Dupont, Charles Henry, 402, 781 Empedocles, 18, 26, 28, 30, 362, 471, 481, 607,
Dupont-Sommer, A., 116 719, 721, 981, 1051
Dupotet de Sennevoy, Baron Denis Jules, 78, Encausse, Gérard, see: Papus
977, 1080 Encausse, Philippe, 781-782, 948-949
Dupuis, Charles, 132 Endler, Renate, 596
Durand of Huesca, 243 Engel, Leopold, 459, 595, 700, 899, 905

--- Page 627 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS 1203
Ennemoser, Joseph, 183, 433, 632, 823 Fabré-Palaprat, Bernard-Raymond, 354-356,
Epictetus, 611 852, 976
Epicuros, 19, 166, 843 Fabri de Peiresc, Nicolas Claude, 236, 666
Epimenides, 988 Fabricius, Johann Albrecht, 539
Epiphanes, 240-241, 868 Fabry, Jacques, 52
Epiphanius of Salamis, 89-90, 141-142, 164, Fadeyev, Helena Andreyevna de, 177
194-196, 228, 251-253, 330-331, 411, 417, Fadeyev, Nadyezhda Andreyevna de, 178
425, 429-431, 758, 765, 767, 868, 896, Faivre, Antoine, 75, 152-153, 219, 273, 340,
1064-1066, I146-1147, 1153 537» 5925 597, 613, 650, 741, 779, 819, 887,
Erasmus, Desiderius, 6-7, 210, 229, 688, 758, 933, 940, IO1§, 1124, 1130-1132,1134,
797, 869, 874 nrg
Erastus, Ira, 1076 Falcke, Ernst Friedrich Hektor, 594
Erastus, Thomas, 320, 612, 918 Falk, Samuel Jacob, 46, 356-357
Ercole II d’Este, 229 Fantoni, 134
Erhard, Werner, 577 al-Farabi, 22, 31, 59, 510, $32, 726, 791, 839
Eriugena, Johannes Scottus, 188, 334-336, 503, Farissol, Abraham, 274
619, 678, 684, 878, 1057 Farmer, Stephen, 275, 1127-1128
Ernest of Bavaria, 469 Farr, Florence, 548-549, 1168
Ernst II of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, 592, 596 Fatio de Duillier, Nicolas, 866
Eslon, Dr d’, 76 Faucheux, Albert, see: Barlet, Francois-Charles
Eschenmayer, Carl August von, 80, 264, 433, Faure, Virginie, 1031
823, 1005 Fauriel, Charles-Claude, 826
Esprit, A. Il’, 882 Faustus, 142, 308, 569-570, 715, 1136
Esquiros, Alphonse, 689-690 Favonius, E., 878
Essarts, Léonce Fabre des, 401 Fax, A.M., 882
Este, Alfonso d’, 395 Fay, Annie Eva, 1076
Este, Lionello d’, 135 Faye, Antoine de la, 206
Etchegoyen, M., 882 Fayolle, Antoine, 402
Etteilla, 51, 60, 329, 343-345, 485, IIIO-II11 Febvre, Lucien, 623
Eucher of Lyon, 878 Febvre, N. le, 49
Euclid, 302, 375, 513, 813, 866, 875, 877, 879, Fechner, Gustav Theodor, 264, 823, 1081, 1183
997, 1160-1161 Feder, Heinrich Johann Georg, 594
Eudemus of Rhodos, 406 Fedeyev, Andrey Mihailovitch de, 177
Eudorus, 567 Fedorov, Nikolai, 1113
Eudoxus, 945, 1128 Feer, Catherine, 1044
Eugentius IV, 293 Fehn, Ernst-Otto, 592-593
Eugenius Philalethes, see: Vaughan, Thomas Feliciani, Serafina, 225
Euhemerus, 91-92 Felkin, Robert William, 436, 548-550,
Euler, Leonhard, 892 ILO9I-1093
Eumolpus, 1127 Felt, George Henry, 180, 1115
Euphrates, 897, 939 Fénelon, Francois, 327, 600, 697
Eusebius of Caesarea, 164, 240-241, 253, 268, Fenton, Geoffrey, 199, 303
341, 420, 429, 678, 687, 703, 767, 804, 868, Ferdinand I, Emperor, 129
961, 1145-1146 Ferdinand I of Aragon, King (Ferrante), 274,
Eutaktos, 89 534, 679-682
Euthymius, 192-194 Ferdinand II of Aragon, King (the Catholic), 391
Evans, Gertrude, 248 Ferdinand II of the Tirol, 231, 236, 459, 1021
Evans, Thomas Penry, 379 Ferdinand of Brunswick, 108, 257, 461-462,
Evans, Walter, 158 750, 872, IOI7, 1032
Evans, Warren Felt, 862 Ferguson, A.S., 478, 488, 494
Evans-Wentz, W.Y., 907 Ferguson, John, 53, 368
Everard, John, 537, 539-541,978 Ferguson, Marilyn, 859
Evodius of Uzalis, 142 Fernel, Jean, 435, 469
Evola, Giulio Cesare, 53, 299, 324, 345-350, Festugiére, André-Jean, 117, 476, 478, 487-489,
436, 444, 457, 743, 908, 966, 979, 1039, 492-493, 498, 514, 520, 527, 529, 541, 560,
1132-1133 562, 566-568, 1053
Ewald, J.L., 699 Feuerbach, Ludwig, 651
Eymeric, Nicolaus, 1176 Fichte, Immanuel Hermann, 82
Ezekiel Poeta, 407, 805 Fichte, Johann Gottlieb , 82, 153, 347, 605,
823, 869, TOOT, 1039-1040, 1084-1085,
Fabre, Benjamin, 356 1178-1179
Fabre, Pierre-Jean, 884 Ficino, Marsilio, 4, 7, 11, 60, 99-101, 103, 118,
Fabre d’Olivet, Antoine, 161-162, 350-354, 131; 135222232,254, 275 929893055\302,
439, 441, 645, 807, 816, 908, 1000-1002, 320, 329, 339, 360-367, 373, 395-396, 399,
1004, 1006, 1031, 1045, 1131 435 483, 489, 533-5355 538, 579 590,
Fabre des Essarts, Léonce, see: Synesius 608-611, 613-614, 623, 627, 640, 667-668,

--- Page 628 ---
1204 INDEX OF PERSONS
680, 687-688, 707-709, 732-734, 736-737, Foss, Augusta, 462-463, 1018
740, 747, 797, 812-815, 841-844, 854, 879, Fosse, Giovan Pietro delle, see: Valeriano,
885-886, 927, 936-937, 949, 951-952, 954, Pierio
960-962, 972-973, 984, 990, 993, 1013, Foster, William, 372
TI27—-1128,LL63, 1193 Fourier, Charles, 658, 673, 689, 816, 986, 1046
Fictuld, Hermann, 262, 367-370, 485, 539, Fournié, Abbot Pierre, 334, 604, 933-934, 1025
TOMS. UmOr, Fournier, Jacques, 244
Fideler, David, 845 Fowden, Garth, 488, 496
Figuier, Louis, 52 Fox, Catherine, 1075
Figulus, Benedictus, 460, 662 Fox, George, 467, 709
Filalete, Niceforo, 1081 Fox, John D., 1075
Filarete (Antonio Averulino), 611 Fox, Margaretta, 1075
Filastrius of Brescia, 164, 251-252, 1064, 1146 Fox, Matthew, 572, 1134
Filelfo, Francesco, 841 Framboisier, Nicolas Abraham de la, 919
Filiger, Charles, 938 Francesco II Gonzaga, 395
Fillmore, Charles, 863 Francis I, King, 229, 687, 965, 971
Fillmore, Myrtle, 863 Francis of Assisi, 396, 610
Finch, Gerard, 553, 1117 Franck, Adolphe, 644-645
Finé, Oronce, 301 Franck, Sebastian, 186, 957, 1165
Fioravanti, Leonardo, 920 Francke, August Hermann, 889, 956
Firmicus Maternus, 113, 115-117, 122-124, Francke, Gotthilf August, 890
130, 133, 169, 504 Franckenberg, Abraham von, 46, 185-186, 626,
Firpo, L. Salvetti, 237 9575 9745 I1II
Firsoff, Valdemar Axel, 825 Frangois de Valois, 320
Firth, Violet Mary, see: Fortune, Dion Frank, Jacob, 356-357
Fischer, Johann, 957 Frank, Sebastian, 536
Fishbough, William, 300 Franklin, Benjamin, 76, 988, 1077, 1082
Flamel, Nicolas, 34, 53, 238, 370-371, 390, Franz Joseph of Austria, Emperor, 948
597, 1180 Franz, Ginther, 596
Flamel, Pernelle, 1180 Franz, Marie-Louise von, 648
Flammarion, Camille, 133, 390, 659, 789, 986, Frazer, James George, 286, 647, 716-717
II4I Frederick August of Brunswick, Duke, 1017
Flamsteed, John, 1098 Frederick II] Hohenstaufen, Emperor, 35, 122,
Flavel, Mrs., 967 126-127, 244, 298, 522, 791, 942, 1016
Flavius Mithridates, 641, 951, 953 Frederick III, Emperor, 679
Flavius, Joseph, 516 Frederick II of Prussia, King (the Great), 597,
Fleischbein, Johann Friedrich von, 325, 603 892, 965, 988, 1016, 1022-1023
Flint, Valerie, 726 Frederick III of Sicily, 102-103, 129, 695
Florinus, 1146 Frederick V Palatine, 269, 710
Flournoy, Théodore, 1140 Frederick William II, 45, 1016-1017
Floyd, Anne Sophia, 203 Freeman, Mary, 967
Floyd, Ebenezer, 203 Fregoso, 396
Fludd, Robert, 46, 131, 156, 179, 261, 306, 318, Freher, Dionysius Andreas, 261-262, 678
321, 371-375, 449, 538, 551, 632, 644, 667, Frére-Colonna, Abbé, 689
7375 748, 800, 813-815, 869, 873, 880, Io14, Freud, Sigmund, 348, 378, 577, 647-648, 650,
I1I06, 1158 825, 1036, 1047, 1085
Fludd, Thomas, 371 Frey, Johannes Rudolf, 279
FBoissacyP-4 77: Frickel, J., 821, 1071
Foix-Candale, Francois, 375-377, 535, 884, Fricker, Johann Ludwig, 80, 822, 886, 891-892,
1124, 1128-1129 Dif
Foligno, Angela de, 72, 956 Friedlander, M., 633
Folz, Hans, 41 Friedrich I von Hohenzollern, 37, 40
Fomalhaut, 133, 136, 138 Friedrich II, 872
Fontaine, Jean S. La, 1037 Friedrich of Baden, Prince, 655
Fontanes, 987 Friedrich, Caspar David, 1042
Fontenelle, Bernard le Bovier de, 45 Friedrich, Wilhelm, 458
Ford, Henry, 986 Frisius, Gemma, 131, 301
Forestier, René le, 401, 461, 595 Fritsch, Theodor, 673
Formisano, Ciro, see: Kremmerz, Giuliano Froebe, Robert, 459
Forster, Elisabeth, 1086 Frommann, Carl Friedrich Ernst, 995
Forster, Georg, 45-46 Fromond, Jane, 302
Forster, Mary, 106 Frosine, Eduardo, 53
Forster-Peters, Helene, 693 Frutolf, 811
Fortune, Dion, 287, 370, 377-379, 436, 5445 Fryar, Robert H., 486, 633, 977
550, 554, 646-647, 742-743, 784, 829 Frydau, J.E. von, 368
Foscolo, Ugo, 298, 359 Fulbert of Chartres, 123

--- Page 629 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS 1205
Fulcanelli, 51, 54, 56, 238-239, 388-391, 1046, Gerbert of Aurillac, 123, 126
1058-1059 Gerhard, Johann, 956
Fulgentius, sor Gerhard of Cremona, 23, 27, 31-32, 60, 123,
Fuller, John Frederick Charles, 282 126, 316, 318, 736, 791, 803
Fuller, Peter, 312 Germer, Karl, 283, 904-906
Fuseli, Johann Heinrich, 173 Gerson, Jean, 688, 954, 1135
Gersonides, 953
Gaboriau, Félix Krishna, 913 Gertrude the Great, 675
Gadal, Antonin, 436, 827, 994, Io19 Gervais du Bus, 512
Gaffarel, Jacques, 235, 290 Gessner, Salomon, 874
Gafurius, Franchinus, 811 Gestefeld, Ursula Newell, 863
Gagnon, Claude, 371 al-Ghazali, 31, 609, 695
Gaius, 253, 867 Gibbon, Edward, 677
Galante, Livius, 537 Gibbon, Hester, 677
Galatino, Pietro, 391-392, 625, 687, 1162 Gibbons, Brian, 684, 970
Galbreath, Robert, 887 Giberti, Gian Matteo, 396, 398
Gale, Thomas, 336 Gichtel, Johann Georg, 46, 105, 150, 261-262,
Galen, 28, 31, 59, 102-103, 220, 231, 300, 320, 267, 392-395, 600, 613, 666, 683-684, 930,
469, 471, 473, 484, 589, 607-609, 885, 956-958,963, 1026, 1063
917-919,923, 945, 1055 Gide, André, 444
Galeotti, Martius, 129 Gifreda, José, 54
Galilei, Galileo, 131, 231, 235-236, 602, 669 Gikatilla, Joseph, 1162
Galitzin, Alexander, 148 Gilbert of Tournai, 510
Gallus, Libanius, 733, 1158 Gilbert, Robert A., 1107
Gallus, Thomas, 295, 312 Gilbert, William, 667
Gamaleja, Semion, 873-874 Gilbert-Lecomte, Roger, 438-440
Ganay, Germain de, 537 Giles, Alfred E., 540
Gandhi, Mohandas K., 908 Gilly, Carlos, 542, 735
Ganivet, Jean, 135 Gilson, Etienne, 271, 1134
Garcaeus, 131, 134 Ginzburg, Carlo, 1175
Garden, George, 197 Giorgiades, Ionnas, 445
Gardiner, Reginald, 436 Giorgio, Francesco, 302, 395-400, 535, 538,
Gardner, Dorothea, 830 624-625, 641, 687, 734, 813-814, 843, 880,
Gardner, Frederick Leigh, 53 G2 OS CLO
Gardner, Gerald Brosseau, 287, 830 Giorgio, Guido de, 345
Garfield, James Abram, 1035 Giovio, Paolo, 8
Garibaldi, Giuseppe, 178 Giuntini, Francesco, 129, 131, 134
Garin, Eugenio, 339, 952 Giustiniani, Agostino, 391, 625, 1162
Garnett, R., see: Trent, A.G. Glanvill, Joseph, 201, 802
Garrett, Eileen, 785 Glaser, C., 49
Garsia, Pedro, 954 Glass, Philip, 817
Gartze, Johann, see: Garcaeus Glatz, Dost von, see: Origanus
Gasqui, 599 Glauber, Johann Rudolph, 44
Gassendi, Pierre, £55 433 47> 1323'236,1372 Gleichen, Baron Carl Heinrich von, 1023
Gassner, Johann Joseph, 76, 676 Gluck, Christoph Willibald, 816
Gassot, Louis, 51 Gmelin, Eberhard, 80, 660
Gaster, M., 634 Gobi, Jean, 621
Gauquelin, Michel, 138, 140 Gobineau de Montluisant, Esprit, 52
Gauricus, Lucas, 128-130, 134-135 Goclenius, Rudolf, 469-470, 886
Geber, 13, 19, 22, 27, 29, 35s 37s 41-435 46, Godelmann, Georg, 612
146, 320, 484-485,523, 715 Godet, Alain, 612-613
Gebhardt, Madame, 691 Godwin, Joscelyn, 339, 630, 647, 743, 812
Geifler, Johann G., 596 Godwin, William, 214
Gell, Robert, 801 Goeckingk, Leopold Friedrich, 591
Gellert, Christian Firchtegott, 874 Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 8, 46, 105, 132,
Genazzano, Fra Mariano da, 1162 136, 432-434, 464, 551, 591, 605, 648, 655,
Genebrard, Gilbert, 484, 1129 665, 675-676, 692, 712, 715, 787, 825,
Gennadius II Scholarius, 222 854-855, 890, 892, 985, 994, 996, IOIS,
Genseric, King, 501 1045, 1059, 1074, 1084-1088, 1167
Gentile, Giovanni, 346 Gogava, Antonio, 130, 134
Gentzken, Friedrich, 262 Gohory, Jacques, 320, 434-436, 1093, 1138
Geoffroy, Etienne-Francois, 45 Gokhale, Gopala Krishna, 172
George I, King, 677 Goldammer, Kurt, 927
George Il, King, 1022 Goldsmid brothers, 357
George of Trebizond, 130, 134, 841 Goldsmith, Joel, 715
Georgiewitz-Weitzer, Demeter, see: Surya Gombault du Vignan, 599

--- Page 630 ---
1206 INDEX OF PERSONS
Gonne, Maud, 1180 Guaita, Stanislas de, 53, 55, 163, 388, 441-442,
Goodman, Linda, 140, 634, 992 540, 780, 938, 1018, 1063, IIII
Goodrick-Clarke, Nicholas, 339 Guarinoni, Hippolyte, 460
Gorceix, Bernard, 394 Guazzelli, Giovanni Maria, 399
Goring, Hugo, 458, 694 Guénon, René Jean Marie Joseph, 1, 54,
Gorp, Jean van, 1129 162-163, 239, 256, 266-267, 297-299, 322,
Gorres, Joseph von, 642, 661, 823, 1003, 324, 345-348, 359, 384-385, 401, 439,
1042 442-445, 45°, 457, 486, 652, 714, 780, 807,
Gorsleben, Rudolf John, 91, 95-96, 675 819, 848, 853, 887-888, 908-909, 915,
Gottfried of StrafSburg, 41 932-933, 966, 978-979, 1043-1044,1057,
Gottschalk of Orbais, 334 10635, 1132-1133
Gouk, Penelope, 812 Guéric of St.-Quentin, 9
Gould, Sylvester Clark, 487, 692 Guesdon, Jeanne, 1019
Gourmont, Remy de, 579 Gui of Corvo, 621
Govinda, Lama Anagarika, 324 Gui, Bernard, 246
Gower, John, 41, 727 Guibourg, Etienne, 1035
Graber, Johann Georg, 393 Guido of Arezzo, 811
Grabianka, Thaddeus Leszczyc, 597-599 Guido of Saint-Denis, 811
Graetz, Heinrich, 633 Guilhabert de Castres, 401
Grainville, P.A. de, 333, 932-933 Guillaume de Conches, 803-804
Granet, Marcel, 275 Guillaume de Lorris, 610
Grant, Kenneth, 287, 905 Guinizelli, Guido, 358-359
Grantrye, Pierre de, 320 Gundel, Wilhelm, 115, 118
Granvelle, Antoine Perrenot, Cardinal de, 320 Gundisalvi, Dominic, see: Gundissalinus,
Grasse, Johann, 662, 1045 Dominic
Grasset d’Orcet, Claude Sosthéne, 390 Gundissalinus, Dominic, 143, 726
Grasshof, Frantz Ludvig, 462 Gunsalvi, John, 144
Grasshoff, Carl Luis von, see: Max Heindel Gurdjieff, George Ivanovitch, 160, 348, 441,
Grassl, Hans, 148 445-450, 451-453, §77, 806-807, 848,
Gratarolo, G., 47 911-913
Gratian, 964 Gustav III of Sweden, King, 872
Gravel, Carl Herrmann, 891 Gustav Vasa, King, 1097
Gravell van Jostenoode, Harald, 93 Gutas, D., 146
Graves, Orval, 55 Guthrie, Kenneth Sylvan, 456
Graves, Robert, 830, 847 Gutmann, Aegidius, 261
Grazie, Marie Eugenie delle, 1085 Guyon, Madame, 105, 321, 325, 327, 601, 603,
Greeley, Horace, 1075 666, 689, 697, 910, 957, 963, 1026
Greene, Liz, 140 Gyorev, Temelko, 309
Greenfield, Richard, 221
Greenless, Duncan, 542 Haase, Rudolph, 817
Greer, John Michael, 647 Habrich, Christa, 959
Gregg, FJ., 555 Hadji Soliman ben Aissa, 899
Gregorius, Gregor A., 379-380, 382, 904, 906 Hadot, Pierre, 818, 836-837
Gregory I (the Great), Pope, 335 Hadrian, 116, 164
Gregory XIV, Pope, 536 Haecke, Louis van, 579
Gregory of Nazianz, 334 Haeckel, Ernst, 674, 713, 1088, 1181
Gregory of Nyssa, 188, 334, 336 Haehl, Alfred, 947-948
Gregory of Sinai, 223 Hagin the Jew, 126
Gregory Palamas, 223 Hagin, Kenneth, 1094
Gregory, David, 1098 Hahn, Michael, 454-455
Grillot de Givry, Emile Angelo, 662 Hahn, Peter Alexeyevich von, 177
Grimaldi, Andrea, 460 Hahnloser, Hans, 1159
Grimes, J. Stanley, 299 Haich, Elisabeth, 329
Grimm, Jacob, 642 al-Hakim, 705-706
Grimod de la Reyniére, 987 Halfon, Elia Menahem, 395, 397
Griset, Claude, 662 Halid ibn Yazid, see: Khalid ibn Yazid
Grivel, Rodolphe, 351 Hall, Manly Palmer, 155-156, 342, 455-456,
Grof, Stanislav, 574, 1134 460, 485, 541, 555, 644, 908, 1024
Grolman, Ludwig indolch Christian von, 595 Hall, R.W., 714
Grombach, Magdalena, 661 Halleux, Robert, 371
Grosche, Eugen, see: Gregorius, Gregor A. Halley, Edmund, 866, 1098
Grosseteste, Robert, 9, 101, 335 Haly Abbas, 31
Grotius, Hugo, 1100 Haly Abenragel, 121-123, 125, 316
Grotowski, Jerzy, 450 Hamann, Georg, 186, 271, 643-644
Grinpeck, Joseph, 129 Hamberger, Julius, 892
Grutherus, 372 Hammer, Joseph, 289, 291

--- Page 631 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS 1207
Hamvas, Béla, 456-458 Hegesippus, 240, 429, 1145
Handel, Georg Frideric, 816 Heidegger, Martin, 271, 456
Hanegraaff, Wouter J., 278, 340, 535, 542, Heidel, Wolfgang Ernst, 1138
615, 631, 645, 712, 716, 739-741, 825, Heindel, Max, 139, 436, 462-464, 993, 1018
829-830, 846, 855, 859-860, 862, 888, Heinhofer, Philippe, 75
999, 1134 Heinrich von Migeln, 41
Hanisch, Otto, 342 Heintz, Josef Sr., 1021
Hansch, Michael Gottlieb, 467 Helene, Heinricus, 811
Hanska, Eveline, 1031 Heliodoros, 22, 26, 118
Harant, Christoph, ro2z1 Heller, A.Q., 882
Hardenberg, Bernhard von, 869 Helminski, Edmund, 849
Hardenberg, Erasmus von, 869 Helmont, Christian van, 469
Hardenberg, Georg Philipp Friedrich von, see: Helmont, Franciscus Mercurius van, 174-176,
Novalis apie baie ah OS kU ot P Mook
Hardt, Hermann van der, 539 1167
Harfaux, Arthur, 439 Helmont, Joan Baptista van, 43-47, 200, 261,
Harlé, Auguste, 202 464-468, 469-474, 540, 612, 632, 670, 869,
Harle, John, 308 921, 930, 958, 1082
Harman, Willis, 1134 Helvetius, Johann Frederich, 44, 988, 1o15
Harnack, Adolf von, 84, 766 Hemberger, Adolf, 380
Harpe, J.F la, 250 Hemsterhuis, Franz, 985
Harpocration of Alexandria, 513 Hennequin, Jean, 207
Harriot, Thomas, 304 Henri II, King of France, 122, 134
Harris, Freida, 283, 1112 Henri III, King of France, 206, 210, 320, 686,
Harris, Thomas Lake, 1077 883, 919
Harrison, C.G., 978 Henri IV, King of France, 73, 375, 919
Hart, Samuel H., 665 Henri, Jean, 658
Hartlib, Samuel, 200, 270, 1013, 1082-1083, Henri of Navarra, see: Henri IV, King of France,
L157 Soy. ILE
Hartmann, Eduard von, 649, 651, 825 Henry of Prussia, Prince, 597
Hartmann, Franz, 95, 458-459, 694, 898-899, Henry IV, King of England, 37, 45, 48
901 Henry VI, King of England 37
Hartmann, Johannes, 38 Henry VIII, King of England 106, 397
Hartmann, Olga Arkadievna de, 447 Henry, William, 1076
Hartmann, Thomas Alexandrovitch de, Henshaw, Thomas, 1157
445-447,453 Hepburn, J.B., 290
Harttmann, Karl Friedrich, 891 Hephaestion of Thebes, 116-117, 124
Hartung, Henri, 324 Heracleon, 427, 1144-1146, I15I-1152, 1154
Harun al-Rashid, 26, 120 Heraclitus, 365, 439, 708, 719, 916, 1128
Harvey, William, 372, 472 Heraclius, 23
Haslmayr, Adam, 459-461, 920, 1009, 1012 Herakleios, Emperor, 26
Hauck, Dennis William, 542 Heraskov, M.M., 872-873
Hauerstein, Georg Jr., 95, 674 Herbelot, Barthélemy d’, 854
Hauffe, Friederike, 80-81, 660-661, 1080 Herbert, Matthew, 1157
Haugwitz, Christian Heinrich, 461-462, 698, Herbort of Berne, 1033
874 Herbort, Friedrich, 52, 327
Hauser, Caspar, 215 Herder, Johann Gottfried, 47, 186, 327, 329,
Hauser, Lionel, 53, 238, 455 433, 485, 539, 551, 591, 655, 892, 907, 986,
Haussermann, Friedrich, 368 994, 1042, L090
Hauterive, Duroy d’, 250, 603, 778, 1025 Herman, Philip, 920
Haven, Marc, 226, 645, 662, 914, 948-949, Hermann of Carinthia, 31, 124, 126, 479, 515,
987, 989 521, 791, 997
Hay, Louise L., 864 Hermann the Lame, 123, 126
Hayden, Maria, 215, 1079 Hermann, Rudolf, 676
Haydn, Joseph, 816 Hermannus of Reichenau, 811
Hayley, William, 174 Hermanstadt, Nicholas Melchior of, 46
Hayn, Jean de, 317 Herngartner, Conrad, 134
Hazard, Paul, roo9 Herodotus, 91, 474, 719
Heap, Jane, 447 Herschel, William, 995
Hebbel, Friedrich, 1043 Heschel, Abraham Joshua, 271
Hecht, Koppel, 890 Hesiod, 365, 617, 708
Hedin, Sven, 446 Hess, Tobias, 74, 1009
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 47, 86, 148, Hesse, Hermann, 648, 789, 882, 892
152-153, 187, 264, 353, 709, 712, 822, 1039, Hesse, Mary, 339
1085, 1181 Hester, John, 920
Hegemonius, 164-165, 758 Heydon, Christopher, 130

--- Page 632 ---
1208 INDEX OF PERSONS
Heydon, John, 163, 345, 570-571 Hopkins, Emma Curtis, 861-863, 1094
Hickman, Bartholomew, 304 Horbiger, Hanns, 381
Hierotheos, 26 Horch, Heinrich, 957
Higgins, Godfrey, 342, 632 Horniman, Annie, 548-549
Hildegard of Bingen, 95, 571-572, 675, 688, Horos, Mme, 549, 784, 1149
810, 964, 1008 Horton, Robin, 717
Hildenbrandt, Paul, 29 Houdas, O., 531
Hilduin, 878 Houdini, Harry, 1076-1077
Hilgers, B.J., 540 Hubbard, Leodora May, 1046
Pal Ch: E., 254 Hubbard, Ron, 770, 1046-1049
Hillman, James, 364, 615 Huch, Ricarda, 80
Hilty, Gerold, 125 Hudry, Frangoise, 503
Himmler, Heinrich, 95-97, 138, 346, 966 Huet, Daniel, 539
Hincmar of Reims, 334, 878 Hufeland, Friedrich, 80
Hindmarsh, Robert, 599, 1106 Hugh of Saint-Victor, 19, 123, 314, 609, 691,
Hipparchus, 114, 116, 514 726-727,1000, 1031
Hippel, Ernst von, 1123-1124 Hugo of Payns, 94
Hippius, Maria, 323-324 Hugo of Santalla, 60, 318-319, 515, 997
Hippocrates, 19, 31, 59, 231, 316, 469, 471, Hugo, Victor, 1000, 1002-1004, 1031
484, 607, 917-919, 923 Humboldt, Alexander von, 148
Hippolytus of Rome , 29, 164, 167-168, 220, Hume, David, 614
228-229, 251, 253, 330-331, 336, 405-406, Humphreys, Christmas, 907
412, 417, 424, 429-430, 475, 581-582, 656, Hund, Baron Karl von, 257, 602, 851, 932,
703, 767, 769, 800-801, 820-821, 867-868, TOSS; LE7Ose 72
895, 897, 939-940, 983, 1064, 1066, 1069, Hunwald, Henri, 54, 238
IO7I-1072, I145-1147, I149, 1152, 1154 Huser, Johann, 918-919, 1010
Hire, Phillipe de la, 1098 Husserl, Edmund, 1
Hirsch, Christoph, see: Stellatus Husson, Bernard, 51, 54, 77-78
Hirschfeld, Ephraim Joseph, 107-108, 643 Hutcheson, Mrs., 677-678
Hirsig, Leah, 283, 286 Hutchinson, William, 384
Hitchcock, Ethan Allen, 52 Hutin, Serge, 394, 684, 888, 966, 970
Hitler, Adolf, 96, 310-311, 346, 675, 848 Huxley, Aldous, 575, 709, 1134
Hjarpe, Jan, 520 Huysmans, Joris-Karl, 438, 579-580, 938, 1035
Hobbes, Thomas, 292, 466, 802, 844 Hyde-Lees, George, 1179-1180
Hobhouse, Stephen, 678 Hyginus, 169, 240, 251, I147
Hoburg, Christian, 957 Hystapes, 112, 116
Hochberg, Friedrich Franz von, 95
Hockley, Frederick, 163-164, 204, 977 Iamblichus, 22, 90, 113, 115, 118, 220-222,
Hodgson, B.H., 907 336, 361-362, 365, 428, 477-478, 568, 608,
Hodgson, Richard, 182, 1118-1119 610, 617, 668, 7O7, 721, 7235 812, 83 5-837,
Hoefnagel, Georg, 1021 841-842, 845, 876, 961, 1126
Hoeschelius, David, 514 Janna, Philip A., 140
Hofer, Karl, 1181 Ibn Abi Usaybi‘a, 530
Hoffmann, E.T.A., 249, 644, 854, L001, 1043 Ibn al-‘Arabi, 267, 271, 615, 705, 966
Hoffmann, Franz, 149 Ibn al-‘Ibri, 530
Hofmann, Melchior, 920 Ibn Juljul, 530
Holbach, Paul Henri Thiry, Baron d’, 989 Ibn Khaldin, 318
Holderlin, Friedrich, 869, 891-892, 1039 Ibn Mansur, 143
Holland, Frederick, 545 Ibn al-Nadim, 27, 330, 530-531
Hollinshead, Alice, 158 Ibn Sab‘in, 532
Holloway, Laura C., 556 Ibn Sina, see: Avicenna
Holmes, Ernest, 864 Ibn Tufayl, 146
Holmes, Nelson, 179 Ibn Umayl, 531
Holmes, Rice, 458 Ibrahim, Fatima, 443
Holst, Gustav, 785, 816 Ibrahim, Muhammad, 443
Holwell, John, 907 Ichazo, Oscar, 577, 848
Holywood, J. of, 626 Icher, Francois, 1161
Homagius, Philipp, 921 Ickstatt, Adam von, 590
Home, Daniel Dunglas, 215, 1076, 1079, 1081 Idel, Moshe, 637-638, 952-953
Homer, 62, 262, 268, 361, 366, 420, 433, 719, Ignatius of Antioch, 253
LIMA OE Soe LOA Ignatius of Loyola, 667, 971
Hompesch, Baron Ferdinand von, 1023 Inayat Khan, Hazrat, 846-847
Hondorff, Andreas, 8 Indy, Vincent d’, 1046
Honorius III, Pope, 336, 791 Ingalese, Richard, 55
Hoogstraeten, Jakob, 391, 990-991 Ingres, Jean Auguste Dominic, 673
Hooke, Robert, 200, 866, 1139 Innocent III, Pope, 243-244

--- Page 633 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS 1209
Innocent VIII, Pope, 951, 1176 Joan of Arc, 587, 620-621
Innocent X, Pope, 668 Jogand-Pagés, Marie-Joseph-Antoine-Gabriel,
Innocent XI, Pope, 603 see: Taxil, Léo
Innocente, Geraldine, 1094 Johann “the Alchemist”, 37
Iphitus, 1127 Johann Georg of Saxony, 190
Irenaeus of Lyon, 164, 167-168, 195-196, 224, Johann von Tepl, 41
228, 240-242, 251-254, 404, 406-407, 409, John Asen II, Czar, 194
411, 417, 422, 425, 429-430, 581, 766, 769, John I, King of Aragon, 1061
786-787, 867-868, 877, 895-897, 939, 975, John Il Komnenos, Emperor of Byzantium, 193
1038, 1064-1066, 1069-1072, 1145-1149, John of Cronstadt, 948
II51I-1155, 1172 John of Glogau, 134
Iselin, Isaac, 279 John of Indagine, 317
Isidore of Seville, 121-123, 126, 164-168, 254, John of Lugio, 243, 245
314, 426, 725-727,878 John of Morigny, 620, 728, 1056
Ispalense, John, 791 John of Murs, 318
Issberner-Haldane, Ernst, 95, 675 John of Salisbury, 314, 317, 319, 501, 505,
lungerich, E.E., 1101 12
Ivanov, Mikhail, see: Aivhanov, Omraam John of Seville, 60, 121, 124-126, 479,
Mikhael 520-521,525
John of the Cross, 312
Ja‘far b. Muhammad Abia Ma'‘shar al-Balkhi, see: John of Toledo, 143
Abit Ma‘shar John XXII, Pope, 37, 319, 621, 746, 944
Jaager, C.E., see: Vere, Ketmia John, R.L., 359
Jabir ibn Hayyan, 22, 27-32, 35, 42, 531, 715 Johnson, Kenneth R., 239
Jackson, Editha, 784 Johnson, Samuel, 916
Jackson, Frank, 784 Johnson, Thomas M., 456, 487, 555
Jacob, Eugéne, see: Star, Ely Johnston, Charles, 555-556, 721
Jacob, J., 645 Johnston, L.A.M., 555
Jacobi, Jolande, 648 Jollivet-Castelot, Francois, 53, 402, 914
Jacobus of Liége, 811 Jonas, Hans, 403, 633, 635
Jacobus of Voragine, 610 Jones, Charles Stansfeld, 283-284, 647, 904
Jacolliot, Louis, 184, 714 Jones, Katherine, 200
Jacques-Dalcroze, Emile, 446, 816 Jones, Marc Edmund, 139
Jaffé, Aniela, 648 Jones, Robert Kenneth, 1107
Jakob, Cyriacus, 47 Jones, Rufus, 678, 970
Jakobowski, Ludwig, 1087 Jones, William, 907
Jakobson, Roman, 795 Jonson, Ben, 48, 308
James I, 154, 304, 372-373, 694, 920 Jonsson, Inge, 1097-1098, I102
James II, roz Jordan of Saxony, 9
James VI Stuart, 1177 Jose ben Halafta, 634
James, Geoffrey, 307 Joseph II, Emperor, 108, 592, 988
James, William, 573, 864, 999 Josephus, Flavius, 341, 472, 703, 749, 804
Janos, Hunyadi, 1023 Jounet, Albert, 915
Janov, Arthur, 577 Jourard, Sidney, 575
Janssen, Frans A., 542 Jouret, Luc, 853
Jantschik, Walter, 380 Jousse, Mathurin, 1160
Jarman, Derek, 308 Joux, P. de, 881
Jaspers, Karl, 456, 1039 Joyce, James, 556
Jaucourt, Chevalier de, 45 Judah the Pious of Regensburg, 640
Jean de Bruges, 955 Judge, William Quan, 171, 184, 205, 556, 785,
Jean le Bon, King, 1008 894, LIL§—-1116, I1L9-1120
Jean of Lorraine, 229 Jugel, J.G.; 1016, 1168
Jean Paul, 153 Julian, Emperor, 493
Jefferson, Thomas, 1077 Julian of Eclanum, 142
Jehuda ben Moses, 516 Julian the Chaldaean, 721
Jehuda Halevi, 122 Julian the Theurgist, 117, 721
Jehuda Moshe, 122 Julius Africanus, 1184
Jelihowsky, Vera Petrovna de, 178 Julius II von Braunschweig, Duke, 207
Jennings, Hargrave, 215, 540, 552, 631-633, Julius II, Pope, 274, 391
713, 900, 977 Jung,Carl Gustav, 14, 17, 55, 745 138, 239, 271,
Jerome, 164, 314, 720-721, 724, 1146 278, 320, 324, 337s 339, 347-348, 419, 434,
Jinarajadasa, C., 1122 447, 573, 615, 631, 641, 647, 648-653,
Joachim of Brandenburg, 1135, 1138 654-656, 714-715, 741, 807, 825, 908, 1040,
Joachim of Fiore, 102-103, 674, 651, 691, 1041, 1043, IIII, 1124, 1142, 1185
706-707, 924, 965, 971-972, 992, 1008, Jung, Edgar Julius, 346
1012 Junger, Ernst, 3.46

--- Page 634 ---
I210 INDEX OF PERSONS
Jungmayr, Petra, 1166 Khunrath, Heinrich, 46-47, 260-261, 321, 441,
Jung-Stilling,Johann Heinrich, 250, 264, 433, 662-663, 698, 733, 814, 958, 993-994, IOII,
602-603, 655-656, 660-661, 665, 676, 697, TOME LO7AN 67
699-700,787, 957, 1026, 1033 al-Khwarismi, 121, 123, 126
Jussieu, Laurent de, 77 Kibre, Pearl, x1
Justin Martyr, 240, 417, 429-430,567, 786, Kieckhefer, Richard, 622, 638, 727
1069-1070, 1072 Kierkegaard, Soren, 448, 1181
Justin the Gnostic, 405, 410, 429-430, 500, Kieser, Dietrich Georg, 80, 823
656-658, 703, 711, I070-1072, I145-1147, Kiesewetter, Carl, 338
1153 al-Kindi, Abi Yusuf Ya‘qub ibn Ishaq, 31,
Jutta of Sponheim,571 58-60, 102, 120-122, 124, 157, 513, 515;
Juvenal, 118, 989 529, 532, 609, 612-613,707, 726
King, Charles William, 183
Kahn, Didier, 320, 370 King, Edmund, 556
Kalisch, Hirsch, 3 56 King, Francis, 51
Kamala-Jnana, 55 King, George, 1143
Kampf, Johann Philipp, 891 King, Godfré Ray, see: Ballard, Guy Warren
Kandinsky, Wassily, 446 Kingsford, Algernon Godfrey, 663
Kankah, 124 Kingsford, Anna Bonus, 181, 540-541, 545,
Kant, Immanuel, 152, 352, 433, 605, 614, 642, 55, 552-554, 630, 647, 663-665, 783, 915,
649, 823, 845, LOOT, 1084, 1103, 1140, 1045, IL17—-I120, 1132, 1169
1178 Kingsley, Peter, 490
Kapplinger, Christiane, 660 Kirby,W.F., 548, 554
Kaplan, Stuart, 1112 Kirchberger, Niklaus Anton, 279, 326-327,
Karamzin, N.M., 699 603-604, 665-666, 676, 1026, 1030
Kardec, Allen, 658-659, 985, 1080-1081, 1141 Kircher, Athanasius, 289-290, 292, 329, 484,
Karl Alexander, Margraf of Anspach, 1022 537-538, 625, 642, 666-670, 737, 800,
Karl August of Saxe-Weimar, Duke, 592 813-815,854, 880, 886, 907, 940
Karl Theodor, Elector, 592 Kirchweger,A.J., 46-47, 262, 433, 551, 874
Karl von Baden, Prince, 320 Kirk, Robert, 384
Karl von Hessen-Kassel, 108, 461-462, Kirov, Penyo, 309
603-604, 676, IOI7, 1023, 1032, Kirsop, Wallace, 884
II7I-I172 Kirstein, Lincoln, 450, 453
Karl Wilhelm, Marquis, 1166 Kitson, A., 204
Kauffer Freyer, Maria, 437 Klaassen, Frank, 73 5-736
Kauffmann, Christian, 461 Klages, Ludwig, 825
Kayser, Hans, 816, 817 Klee, Paul, 423
Kazakova, Maria, 309 Kleist, Heinrich von, 874, 1042-1043
Keats, John, 829, r0o00, 1002 Klemm, Jakob Friedrich, 891-892
Keith, George, 670 Klemming, G.E., 1101
Keleph Ben Nathan, see: Dutoit-Membrini, Klencke, Philipp Friedrich Hermann, 342
Jean-Philippe Klettenberg, Johann Hector von, 432
Keller, Marie-Victoire, Countess, 1031 Klettenberg, Susanna Catharina von, 432, 892
Kellerman, John P., 51 Kleuker, Johann Friedrich, 322, 594, 1130
Kelley, Edward, 53, 106, 303-304, 307, 1022 Klinger, Max, 198
Kellner, Carl, 402, 459, 898-902 Knapp, Augustus, 455, 1024
Kelly, Gerard FE, 282 Knigge, Adolf Freiherr, 591, 593-595, 1017
Kelly, Rose, 282 Knight, Christopher, 853
Keme, Margery, 620 Knobloch, Charlotte von, 1103
Kempis, Thomas a, 95, 469, 602, 675 Knorr von Rosenroth, Christian, 48, 175, 392,
Kepler, Johannes, 111, 129, 131, 134-135, 188, 464-466, 553, 624, 641-642, 645-647,
372-374, 448, 666, 668-669, 814-815, 1009, 670-671, 783-784, 802, 890, 957, 1167
1021, 1098 Knowlton, Charles, 170
Kerensky, Alexandre, 806 Koestler, Arthur, 825
Kerenyi, Karoly, 456 Koffshki, Vincentius, 3.4
Kerner, Justinus Andreas Christian, 80, 433, 573, Kogutzki, Felix, 1084-1085
613, 660-662, 700, 741, 788, 823-824, 1043, Kohn, Julius, 53
1080 Kojéve, Alexandre, 271
Kerning, J.B., 95, 675 Kolbenheyer, Erwin, 93
Kersey, H.A., 204 Kolesnikovy, Siluan, 697
Kertzenmacher, Peter, 38, 44 Kollin, Konrad, 6
Ketchum, Wesley, 248 Komensky, Jan Amos, see: Comenius, Jan Amos
Ketton, Robert of, see: Robert of Chester Komnena, Anna, 193
Keyserling, Hermann, 825, 1181 Komnenos, Manual, 193
Khalid .b. Yazid, 23,'275.31529553 Kopp, Hermann, 52
Khnopff, Fernand, 938 Koppe, Johann Benjamin, 594

--- Page 635 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS I211
Koppen, Friedrich von, 329 Lapasse, Louis-Charles-Edouard de, ror8
Kortum, C.A., 51, 551, 959 Laplace, Jean, 55, 239, 988
Kostka, Jean, see: Doinel, Jules Larose, Marc-Reymond, 1161
Kostka, Stanislas, 826 Larronde, Carlos, 1046
Kostlin, Nathanael, 892 Las Casas, Sebastian de, 334, 933
Koyré, Alexandre, 271, 612, 623 Lasker-Schiler, Else, 1087
Kramer, Heinrich, 1176 Laski, Olbracht, 303, 1022
Krasinski, Z., 1179 EASSUSsa bens O
Krauss, Dr., 402 Lauchen, G.J. von, see: Rheticus
Kremmerz, Giuliano, 348, 377, 540, 671-672, Laurant, Jean-Pierre, 51
743, 782, 979 Lautréamont, Comte de (Isodore Ducasse), 438
Krenn, Walther, 97 Lavater, Diethhelm, 676
Krieg, Gustav, 963 Lavater, Johann Caspar, 173) 2797317, 327,
Krieger, Dolores, 861 461, 602-603, 665-666, 675-677, 941, 957;
Kriegsmann, Wilhelm Christoph, 484, 538 1023, 1033
Kriele, Martin, 1124 LaVey, Anton Szandor, 287, 308, 1036-1037
Krishnamurti, Jiddu, 172, 554, 630, 685-686, Lavoisier, Antoine-Laurent, 43-46, 76, 551, 988
908, 1023, 1089, I121I-1122 Lavritch, Jean, 238
Kristeller, Paul Oskar, 99, 339, 936 Law, William, 174, 262, 267, 600, 602,
Kridener, Julie de, 603 677-679, 911, 1025-1026
Kruger, Felix, 323 Lawrence, D.H., 450
Krumm-Heller, Arnoldo, 903-904, 906, 1020 Layard, Austen Henry, 91
Kuhlmann, Quirinus, 46, 186, 261 Laycock, Donald, 307
Kuhlwein, Mr., 177 Lazzarelli, Filippo, 682
Kuhn, Sophie von, 605, 869 Lazzarelli, Gerolamo, 682
Kummer, Maria Gottliebin, 958 Lazzarelli, Lodovico, 7, 254, 273-274; 339 376,
Kunz, Dora, 861 483, 534-535, 613, 679-683, 688, 1128-1129
Kurschner, Josef, 1085-1086 easel Senco
Kutuzov, A.M., 697, 873 Lead, Jane, 63, 149, 261-262, 267, 393, 613,
666, 678, 683-685, 968, 1026
Laban, Rudolf van, 903 Lead, William, 683
Lablatiniére, Claude, see: Ygé, Claude d’, Leadbeater, Charles W., 95, 171-172, 342, 388,
Labrousse, Suzette, 601, 910 458, 557, 685-686, 785-786, 908, 927, 942,
Labzin, Alexander F, 322, 698 1023,4114, 1120-1122, 1141
Lachatre, Maurice, 337 Lebano, Giustiniano, 671-672, 782
Lactantius, 362, 477, 479, 482-483, 493-494, Lebesgue, Philéas, 238, 390
500-501, 503, 505, S10, §21, 560-561, Leblanc, Maurice, 226
567-569, 618, 687, 703-704, 838, 842, 1126 Deer arniet 6oo3
Lacuria, Paul Francois Gaspard, 645, 672-673, Lee, Francis, 683
S16, 6625 913. L133 Leene, Jan, see: Rijckenborgh, Jan van
Lacy, Anne, 801 Leene, Zwier Wilhelm, 993, 1ro19
LaDue, Francia, 1120 Leeuwenhoek, Anton van, 1098
Lafontaine, Charles, 78 Le Févre de la Boderie, Guy, 397, 535, 686-687,
Laing, S.D., 1183 708, 813, 1128
Lalande, Emmanuel, see: Haven, Marc Le Févre de la Boderie, Nicolas, 686-687
Lamartine, Alphonse de, 1002-1003, 1005 Lefévre d’Etaples, Jacques, 5, 254, 350, 362,
Lamb, Caroline, 214 376, 534-535, 572, 682, 687-689, 732, 841,
Lambeccius, Petrus, 1129 844, 854, 879, 970, 1128-1129
Lambsprinck, 371 Léger, Michel, 781
Lamennais, Félicité Robert de, 673, 690, 778 Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, ror, 186, 293,
Lamettrie, Julien Offray de, 988 464-465, 467-468, 484, 539, 641-642, 667,
Lamm, Martin, 1100 670, 709, 822, 844, 890, 892-893, 984, IO16,
Lamy, Jeanne (Isha), 1046 1098, I100, 1130, 1132, 1134
Landino, Cristoforo, 298, 399 Leigh, Richard, 828, 853
Landsperg, Baron von, 1171 Lejay, Julien, 1113
Lanfranc, 1061 Lemerle, Louis, 1113
Lang, Marie, 1085 Lemery, Nicholas, 43, 49
Lange, J.C., 880 Lempriére, John, 829
Langford Garstin, Edward J., 53 Lenain, Lazare Républicain, 52, 645
Langham, J.M., 139 Lenglet-Dufresnoy, Nicolas, 940
Langland, William, 41 Lenoir, Alexandre, 329
Langlet-Dufresnoy, Nicholas, 485 Lenz, Johann Christoph, 322, 1032
Lanz von Liebenfels, Jorg, 91-97, 673-675, 694, Lenzoni, C., 539
853 Leo Hebraeus, 131
Lanz, Johann Jakob, 595 Leo X, Pope, 4, 129, 391, 992, 1163
Lao-Tzu, 323, 556, 1181 Leo, Alan, 132, 138-139

--- Page 636 ---
I212 INDEX OF PERSONS
Leonardo of Pistoia, 489, 533 List, Guido Karl Anton von, 91, 95-97, 675,
Leopold I, Emperor, 45, 464-465 693-694
Leopold II, Emperor, 872 Liszt, Cosima, 1045
Leopold of Austria, 127 Little, Robert Wentworth, 1018
Leowitz, Cyprian, 129, 134-135 Llull, Ramon, 5-6, 23, 35, 53, 103, 123, 179,
Lepelletier de Morfontaine, 987 230, 647, 667, 669, 682, 688, 694-696, 701,
Lepsius, K.R., 552 707, 709, 798-800, 865, 869, 874, 879, 917,
Leroux, Pierre, 337, 354, 965, 1003-1004, 922, 944-9051, LOLO, O62, nLOrA. ist hl.
1031 1179
Lesser, Friedrich, 822 Locke, John, 15, 200, 293, 464, 467-468, 642
Lessing, Doris, 847 Lohr, Charles, 99
Lester, Caignet de, 333-334, 933 Lomas, Robert, 853
Lestrange, A. de, 887 Lomazzo, Gian Paolo, 611, 947
Leto, Pomponio, 680 Lombard, J.-P., 10, 98
Letrouit, J., 1184 Longfellow, Henry W., 485
Leuba, James, 573 Lopukhin, Ivan Vladimirovich, 266, 322, 327,
Leukippos, 18, 26, 30 604, 697-699,778, 873-874, 910
Levey, Howard Stanton, see: LaVey, Anton Lorber, Jakob, 631, 675, 699-701, I140
Szandor Lorenzo, Emilio, 782
Levi ben Gerson, 131 Lotto, Lorenzo, 229
Lévi, Eliphas, 55, 95, 1335 2153250, 266,271, Louis I, the Pious, Emperor and King, 122
337-338, 344, 387, 441, 540, 552-553, 614, Louis IX, King, 244, 1174
644-645, 647, 662, 675, 689-692, 709, 742, Louis XI, King, 129
887-888, 913-914, 938, 965-966, 974, 1031, Louis XII, King, 274, 680
Vision aio hk 32. 164s TE6S Louis XIII, King, 45, 236, 919
Levingston, William, 299-300 Louis XIV, King, 132, 317, 984, 1035, 1037
Levinus, Lemnius, 435 Louis XV, King, 1022, 1024
Levita, Elia, 391, 395, 1162 Louis XVI, King, 201, 225, 872, 909
Lévy-Bruhl, Lucien, 439, 717 Louise of Savoy, 5
Lewi, Grant, 139 Loup, Yvon Le, see: Sédir, Paul
Lewis, C.S., 169, 447 Loury, Berthe, 443
Lewis, Harvey Spencer, 342, 402, 692-693, 781, Lovecraft, Howard Phillips, 905
903, TO1g Lovejoy, Arthur Onken, 712
Lewis, R.M., rorg9 Lovell, Emma, 1164
Lewis, Samuel, 847 Low, Rabbi Juddah, 1022
Lewis, Wyndham, 450 Lowe, Stephen, 308
Lewy, Hans, 818 Lowen, Alexander, 576, 578
Lezay-Marnésia, 987 Lower, Richard, 200
Lhote, J.-M., 280 Loxus, 316
Libavius, Andreas, 38, 43-44, 320, 372-373, Loys de Chéseaux, J.-Ph., 279
869, 915-919 Lubbock, John, 713
Libelt, K., 1179 Lucan, 726
Lichtenberg, Georg Christoph, 677 Lucas, Albert-Jean, 807
Lichtenberger, Johann, 129-130, 134, 924 Lucas, Louis, 816, 913
Liebknecht, Wilhelm, 1087 Lucian, 73,8102, 2205 33651476
Liechtenstein, Peter, 124 Lucius III, Pope, 243
Liedtke, Ralph, 542 Lucretius, 19, 210, 365, 708
Lienhard, Friedrich, 93 Ludolph ab Indagine, Johann, rors
Lightfoot, John, 670 Ludovico il Moro, 129
Lillie, Arthur, 342 Ludwig I of Bavaria, King, 1042
Lilly, John, 324 Ludwig, Karl, 464-465
Lilly, William, 106, 130, 133, 155, 646 Lueger, Karl, 694
Limojon de Saint-Didier, A.T., 238 Luhrmann, Tanya M., 614-615, 717, 740
Lincoln, Abraham, 52, 292 Lukacs, Georg, 456
Lincoln, Henry, 828 Lund, Benedict, 1097, 1099, 1107
Linden, Stanton J., 537 Luria, Isaac, 175, 466, 670, 890, 984
Linden, Joseph von, 108 Luther, Martin, 6, 47, 72, 74-75, 104-105,
Lindl, Ignaz, 327 129-130, 187, 209-210, 272, 311, 455, 460,
Lineham, Peter J., 1106 497, 612, 688, 710, 746, 758, 788, 845, 891,
Lings, Martin, 444 924, 958, 991-992,IOIO, 1176
Link, Paul, 919 Luzzatto, Moses Hayim, 356
Linnell, John, 174 Lycurgus, 1127-1128
Linsenmann, Christiane Dorothea, 889 Lydus, John, 564, 617, 1065
Linus, 166, 1064 Lyon, Silis, 300
Lipsey, Roger, 444 Lytton, Elizabeth Barbara, 213-217
Lipsius, R.A., 1064 Lytton, Rosina, 214

--- Page 637 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS 1213
Ma/’ashar, 707 429-430, 757, 764, 765-768, 975, 1072,
Macarius (Pseudo-), 890 1147
MacDermot, Violet, 417 Marcombes, Isaac, 200
MacGregor Reid, Robert, 831 Marconis de Négre, Jacques-Etienne, 337, 387,
Machen, Arthur, 1165 768-769
Machiavelli, Niccolo, 434, 965 Marcus the Magician, 429, 769-770
Mackenzie, Kenneth, 545, 552, 645, 783, 977, Marenbon, J., 838
1169 Margaret of Austria, 4, 6
MacLaine, Shirley, 859, 1134 Margaret of Navarra, 687
Macpherson, James, 350 Marguerite de Valois, 129
Macrobius, 87, 169, 707, 810, 837, 878 Mariategui, Maria, see: Caithness, Lady Marie
Matfesoli, M., 652 Countess of
Magee, Hamilton Malcolm, 555-556 Maria Teresa of Austria, 132
Magini, J.A., 129, 131, 135 Maria, Giovanni, 395
Magre, Maurice, 827 Marie Antoinette, Queen, 225
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, 817 Marie de la Rose, see: Marie de Sainte-Thérése
Maharshi, Sri Ramana, 324 Marie de Sainte-Thérése, 891
al-Mahdi, 124 Marinetti, Filippo Tommaso, 345
Mahé, Jean-Pierre, 489, 493, 496, 541 Marinus of Neapolis, 70
Mahler, Gustav, 816 Maritain, Jacques, 1134
Maier, Michael, 21, 41, 47-48, 51, 329, Marius Victorinus, 413, 428, 836, 1065
484-485, 538, 618, 747-749, 965, Iorl, Mark of Ephesus, 960
IO14, 1021 Markos Eugenikos, see: Mark of Ephesus
Mailander, Alois, 458, 789 Marks, Tracy, 140
Maillat, Henriette, 938 Marlowe, Christopher, 308
Maimon, Salomon, 642 Marryat, Ellen, 170
Maimonides, 706, 953, 964 Marsanes, 90, 420, 427-428, 770, 836, 1066
Maistre, Joseph de, 161, 265, 601, 603, 691, Marsianos, 90, 1065
749-751, 77°, 778, 934, 965-966, 1026, Marta, Giacomo Antonio, 231
PEereg 72 Marteau, Paul, 1112
Maitland, Edward, 181, 540-541, 545, 550, Marti, Raymond, 1o2
552-554, 664-665, 1117, 1119, 1169 Martiades, 90, 1065
Majercik, Ruth, 837, 1065 Martial, 118, 476
al-Majriti, 121 Martianus Capella, 126, 169, 810, 837, 878
al-Majusi, Ali b. al-Abbas, 31 Martin, Martino, 669
Malebranche, Nicolas, 892, 1100 Martin, Rabia, 847
Malfatti, Giovanni, 823, 881 Martinez-Pasqualis, Joachim Don, 332, 334
Malinowski, Bronislaw, 717 Martini, Raimundus, 391
Mambro, Joseph di, 853 Mary of Burgundy, 1136
al-Ma’mun, 26, 58-59, 120, 515, 518, 532 Mary the Jewess, 21-22, 24-25, 27, 30
Ma’mian, Ali b., 143 Mary, Queen, 302
Mandl, Johann Franz von, 595 Masha’a’llah (ma’shallah, Masha’ Allah), 120,
Mandres, 322 122, 124-125
Mandrou, Robert, 1175 Maslow, Abraham, 573-575
Manetho, 112, 115-116, 477-478, 567 Massa, Aniceto del, 345
Manfred of Sicily, King, 316, 516 Massey, Charles Carleton, 553, 1117
Manfredi, Bartolomeo, 129 Massignon, Louis, 271, 530
Manget, Jean-Jacques, 41, 47, 147 Mastallerus of Breisgau, 130
Mani, 142, 330, 425, 619, 657, 704, 753, Matgioi, 401, 441
756-757,758-764, 983, 1052, 1066, Mathers, Moina, 377-378, 548, 550, 783
1184 Mathers, Samuel Liddell “MacGregor”,
Manilius, 116-117, 122, 129-130, 133, 169 281-282, 377, 541, 545-550, 554, 646, 664,
Mann, Heinrich, 789 671, 742-743, 783-785, LogI, 1093, 1169,
Mann, Tad, 140 II1I1, 1179-1180
Mann, Thomas, 8, 789 Mathew, Arnold Harris, 686, 1121
Mansfield, Katherine, 447 Matisse, Henri, 1046
al-Mansur, Abi-Ja‘far, 120 Matter, Jacques, 337
Mantino, Jacob, 395 Matthews, Caitlin, 831, 1134
Manuel II Paleologos, Emperor, 960 Matthews, John, 831, 1134
Manwaring, Eleanor, 106 Matthias, Emperor, 188
Marcel, Gabriel, 346 Matthioli, Pietro Andrea, 469, 918
Marcellina, 240 Mauchel, Lucien, see: Chamuel, Lucien
Marcellus of Ancyra, 706, 1147 Maul, Johann Philipp, 47, 662
Marcenne, Christian, 931 Mauriac, Francois, 450
Marchetti, Paolo, see: Virio, Paolo M. Maurus, R., 878
Marcion, 240-241, 251-253, 311, 417, Mauss, Marcel, 716-717

--- Page 638 ---
I214 INDEX OF PERSONS
Mavalankar, Damodar K., 182, 1118 433, 602-605, 614, 660, 667, 676, 822, 859,
Max Joseph of Bavaria, Prince Elector, 76 886, 888, 910, 1043
Maximenko, Sophia Grigorievna, 912 Messalah, 120, 124
Maximilian, Archduke, 460 Messos, 427, 1065
Maximilian I, Emperor, 4, 129, 991, 1022, Mesue, 917
1136, 1138 Metamon, Paulos, 177, 179
Maximilian II, Emperor, 129, 302, 305, 376, Metrovitch, Agardi, 178
965, 1021 Metsu, G., 44 -
Maximilian of Austria, Archduke, 459-460 Metternich, Wolf, 539
Maximus of Ephesus, 221, 721 Metz, Johann Friedrich, Jr., 432, 551, 890,
Maximus the Confessor, 334-335, 878 1167
May, Rollo, 573 Metz, Johann Friedrich, Sr., 890
Mayo, Herbert, 80 Metzger, Héléne, 15
Mayreder, Rosa, 1085 Metzger, Hermann Joseph, 380, 905
Mazarin, Jules, 129 Meucci, S., 1162
Mazzini, Giuseppe, 178 Meun, Jean de, 41, 169, 610
McFadden, Ashley, ror9 Meyendorff, Nicholas, 178
McIntosh, Christopher, 339 Meyer, Johann Friedrich von, 52, 264, 643, 661,
McLean, Adam, 55 787-788,823, 869, 1033
McMurtry, Grady Louis, 905-906 Meyer, Mary, 788
McNallen, Stephen, 832 Meyfart, Johann Matthaus, 956
Mead, George Robert Stowe, 456, 541, Meyrat, Robert, 438
554-555;647, 785-786, 845, 908 Meyrink, Gustav, 54, 198, 308, 346, 630, 648,
Mead, Laura Mary, 184, 785 785, 788-791,I111
Meakin, Neville, 1092 Meysenberg, Malwide de, 1045
Mechthild of Hackeborn, 688 Meyssonier, Lazare, 626, 799
Mechthild of Magdeburg, 20, 95, 675 Michael Scot, 23, 123, 126, 316, 480, 506, 511,
Mede, Joseph, 802 517, 522-523, 726, 746, 791-792, 847, 1050
Medici, Antonio de’, 460 Michael of Tarragon, 515
Medici, Catherine de’, 129 Michael the Stammerer, 334
Medici, Cosimo de’, 360, 489, 533, 842, 960 Michelangelo Buonarotti, 625
Medici, Gian de’, 1023 Michelet, Jules, t000, 1002-1003
Medici, Lorenzo de’, 274, 360-361, 842, 950, Michelet, Victor-Emile, 781
992, 1162 Michels, Robert, 449
Medici, Marie de’, 129 Michelstaedter, Carlo, 345
Medigo, Elijah del, 641, 950-952 Mickiewicz, A., 1179
Meher Baba, 817, 847 Migne, Abbé Jacques-Paul, 690
Méheust, Bertrand, 614, 1140 Militz, Annie Rix, 863, 1094
Mehren, M.A.EF, 146 Millanges, Simon, 375
Meillassoux-Le Cerf, M., 598 Milosz, Oscar Vladislas, 436, 792-793, 1046
Meiners, Christoph, 593-594 Milton, John, 174-176, 484, 538, 965, 1029
Meinstoff, Johann Ferdinand von, see: Fictuld, Minet, Pierre, 439
Hermann Minos, 1127
Melanchthon, Philippus, 6, 129-130, 797 Mirabeau, Honoré Gabriel Riquetti, 601
Meleager, 73 Mirkovich, Georgi, 309
Mélinge, Calixte, see: Alta, Abbé Miseroni, Ottavio, 1021
Mellet, M. le Comte de, 280, 344 Mizaldus, A., 44
Melton, J. Gordon, 587, 1140 Mizauld, Antoine, 129
Menahem of Recanati, 953 Mocenigo, Giovanni, 207, 936
Menander, 429-430, 786-787, 1038 Moderatus of Gades, 876
Ménard, Louis, 540-541 Moét, J.P., 1107
Mendelssohn, Moses, 892, 1103 Moffett, Thomas, 918
Mendés, Catulle, 914 Mohottivatte, Gunananda, 1116
Menippos, 73 Molay, Jacques de, 852-853
Menoch, 142 Molinos, Miguel, 105, 197
Mercator, Gerard, 301, 304, 1009 Molitor, Franz Joseph, 357, 643
Mercier, Sébastien, 778, 987 Molitor, Ulrich, 1176
Mercouroy, Sergei Dmitirievich, 446 Molt, Emil, togo
Meredith, Owen, see: Bulwer-Lytton, Edward Mombaer, Jean, 688
Robert Moncordius, Godeschalcus, 6
Mersenne, Marin, 47, 372-373, 470, 538, Mondoré, Pierre, 301
814-815,884 Monod, Guillaume, 401
Merton, Thomas, 445 Monod-Hertzen, Gabriel, 324
Merula, Giorgio, 679 Monoimus, 407, 429-430, 800-801
Mesmer, Franz Anton, 75, 76-77, 79, 215, 280, Monspey, Alexandre de, 602

--- Page 639 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS 1215
Monspey, Marie-Louise de, 602 Motte, Jeanne de la, 225
Montaigne, Michele de, 375, 376-377, 1124 Mouravieff, Andrei, 806
Montanari, Giovanni, 132 Mouravieff, Boris, 806-807
Montanus, Arius, 687 Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 816, 892
Monte Ulmi, Antonius de, 525 Mubashshir ibn Fatik, 530
Monte, Philip de, roz1 Much, Matthaus, 91, 139
Montespan, Frangoise de, 1035 Muchembled, Robert, 1175
Montesquieu, Charles-Louis de Secondat, Baron Mugnier, Arthur, 579
de, 874 Muhaiyaddeen, Bawa, 849
Montesson, Madame de, 909 Muhammad, 157, 532, 705-706, 714
Montessori, Maria, 1095 Muhammad Ali Khan, 847
Montfaucon de Villars, Nicolas Pierre Henri, Mihsam, Erich, 789, 1087
626, 1167 al-Mu‘izz b. Badis, 121
Montone, Christoforo da, 679 Mulla Sadra, 532
Montpezat, Marquis of, 599 Miller, Adam, 823, 1042
Moore, George, 556 Miller, Elise, see: Smith, Héléne
Moore, Thomas, 364 Miller, Friedrich Max, 278, 632, 712, 907
Mopsik, Charles, 818 Miller, Johann, see: Regiomontanus
Morandi, Orazio, 236 Miller, Johann Daniel, 51, 597, 604, 957
Moray, Robert, 384-385, 1157-1158 Miller, Polycarp, 957
Mordente, Fabrizio, 207 Mulsow, Martin, 484, 497, 537, 594, 1129
More, Alexander, 801 Munchgesang, Dorothea, 995
More, Gabriel, 801 Mund, RudolfJ., 97
More, Henry, 179, 261, 291, 403, 464, 466-467, Munninger, Eduard, to19
538, 570, 641, 670, 801-803, 844, 865-866, Munson, Gorham B., 447
984, I100 Murphy, Michael, 575
More, Thomas, 233, 965 Murray, Margaret, 830, 1175
Moreau, Gustave, 938 Musaios, 166, 1064
Moreno, Jacob L., 574 Muses, C.A., 132, 678, 793-794, 1032
Moreschini, Claudio, 535 Musil, Robert, 648
Morestel, Pierre, 799 Mussolini, Benito, 345-346, 966, 979
Morganweg, Iolo, 831 al-Mu‘tasim, 58-59
Morghen, R., 242 al-Mutawakkil, 59
Morhof, Daniel Georg, 15 Muti, Francesco, 1129
Moriarty, Theodore, 378 Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Biriini, 120, 125
Morienus Romanus, 23, 27, 31 Myers, Frederick W.H., 1080, 1118
Morike, Eduard, 892 Mylius, J.D., 48
Morin, E., 652
Morinty)|sb., 132.1135 Nabod, Valentin, 129, 131, 134
Moritz of Hessen-Kassel, 38, 45, 304, 814 Nabuchadnezzer, 111
Morlet, L., 776 al-Nadim, Abd ’I-Faradj ibn, 983
Morley, Daniel of, 21, 479, 502, 505, 521, Naess, Arne, 448
803-804 Nagel, Edith, 437
Morley, John, 830 al-Naggar, S$. 146
Mornay, Philippe de, 376, 535, 1129 Naglowska, Maria de, 978, 1036
Morris, Emily, 170 Nallino, C.A., 146
Morris, William, 830 Napoleon Bonaparte, 160, 352, 355, 387, 551;
Morrison, Richard James, see: Zadkiel 749, 768, 806, 911, 966, 1004
Morsier, Emilie de, 1045 Nardi, Bruno, 297, 944
Morveau, Louis Joseph need Philibert Guyton Nash, John Henry, 455
de, see: Brumore Nasr, Seyyed Hosseyn, 444-445, 709, 1132,
Moses, 21-22, 24, 36, 64-65, 69, 87, 94, 165, 1134
190, 192-193, 228, 245, 293, 328, 351, 3535 Nasr, al-Din, Mulla, 848
356, 361-362, 373-374, 376, 398, 407, 417, Nath, Babajee D., 182
474, 477, 480, 483-485, 497-498, 524, Naudé, Gabriel, 47, 947, 1013
534-535, 569, 624, 639, 657, 703-704, Naxagoras, Ehrd de, 485, 539
706-708, 711, 714, 719, 723, 7535 7675 Nazarius, 245
775-776, 802, 804-806, 841, 843, 866, 892, Nechepsos, 112, 115, 514
895, 897, 927, 952, 961, 964, 992, 1009, Needham, Joseph, 275
IOII, 1016, 1045, 1064, 1080, 1094, 1103, Needleman, Jacob, 444
1127-1129, 1131-1132, 1153, 1183 Nehru, Jawaharlal, 172
Moses, William Stainton, 1080 Nehru, Motilal, 172
Mosheim, Johann Lorenz von, 293, 844-845 N emesios of Emesa, 31, 608
Mothu, Alain, 46 N Jequam, Alexander, 511
Motta, Marcelo Ramos, 905 N Jéroman, D., 882

--- Page 640 ---
1216 INDEX OF PERSONS
Nerval, Gérard de, 249-250, 329, 438, 672, Oberlin, Jean Frederic, 602, 1033
778, 854-855, 988, 1002-1003 Obrist, Barbara, 879
Nesi, Giovanni, 534 Ochino, Bernardino, 398
Nestorius, 493 Ochorowicz, Julian, 79
Nettelbladt, C.C.EW., 368 Odeberg, H., 634
Neuburg, Victor B., 282 Oecolampadius, 921
Neufchateau, Francois de, 987 Oener, Martha, 437
Neumann, Wilhelm, 1085 Oersted, Hans Christian, 823-824, 995
Newton, Isaac, 15, 43, 46, 200, 293, 339, Oetinger, Friedrich Christoph, 47, 80, 173, 186,
538-539, 642, 696, 710-711, 814-815, 260, 262, 264-265, 322, 368-369, 4335
865-867, 890, 892, 1083, 1098 454-455, 551, 605, 643, 662, 709, 741, 822,
Nicetas, Papas, 243 886, 889-894, 956-959, 1004, IOI5, 1039,
Nicholas of Clamanges, 954 1042, II40
Nicholas of Otranto, 318 Oetinger, Johann Christoph, 889
Nichols, Ross, 831 Oetinger, Johann Friedrich, 889, 1042
Nicholson, Reynold A., 785 Oken, Lorenz, 823-824, 1005
Nicholson, William, 995 Olcott, Henry Steel, 171, 179-182, 205, 458,
Nicolai, Friedrich, 322, 326-327, 539, 591, 604, 553-5545 556-557, 664, 894-895, 907,
IOI6—-I017, 1032 912, 985, 1078-1079, 1089, III 4—1120,
Nicolas II, Tsar, 446, 948 EEaz
Nicolaus, 195, 707, 867-868 Old, Walter Richard, 184
Nicolescu, Basarab, 450, 652, 1134 Olearius, Gottfried, 844-845
Nicoll, Henry Maurice Dunlop, 447 Olieu, Pierre Dejean, 103, 1007-1008
Nicollaud, C., see: Fomalhaut Oliver, Rd. G., 882
Nicomachus of Gerasa, 876 Olympiodoros, 16, 22, 25-26, 29, 962
Nicotheos, 1065 Onofri, Arturo, 345, 1039
Nider, Johann, 1176 Oporin,J., 973
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 83, 345, 347, 649, 651, Orage, Alfred Richard, 446-447, 913
715, 1045, 1086-1088 Oresme, Nicole, 314
Nifo, Agostino, 130, 134 Origanus, 135
Nigidius Figulus, P., 116 Origen, 164-166, 168, 220, 240-242, 253, 331,
Nikephoros, 22 335-336, 363, 396, 401, 405, 411, 427, 556,
Noailles, Francois de, 236 684, 767, 772-773, 877, 983, 896-897, 939,
Nock, A.D., 403, 413, 488-489, 492-493, 541 1064, 1145-1147, 1152-1154
Nodier, Charles, 280, 778, 1003 Orléans, Bathilde d’, 196, 264, 601, 603,
Noél, Frangois-Nicolas, 51 909-911
Noel, Roden, 553 Orléans, Louis-Phillipe d’, 909
Nolan, James, 556 Orme, Philibert de I’, 385, 1160
Nollius, Heinrich, to1, 537, 484 Orr, Emma Restall, 832
Nordenskjéld, Auguste, 941 Ortega y Gasset, José, 449
Nordenskjéld, Carl Frederic, 941 Orvius, Conrad, rors
Norman, H.E, 557 Osiander, Andreas, 47, 924
North, Violet, 2, 120, 122, 556 Ossowiecki, Stefan, 714
Norton, Thomas, 106, 483, 748, 1055 Ostade, Adriaen van, 44
Nostradamus, 55, 129, 134, 540, 715, 858 Ostanes, 22, 24,27, 112, 116,722
Novalis, 47, 148, 151-153, 191, 264, 345, 438, Osten-Sacken, Friedrich von, 264
458, 605, 643-644, 741, 823, 825, 869-871, Osterlin, Franzl, 76
994, 996, IOOI-1005 Ostrowska, Julia Osipovna, 447
Novara, Domenico Maria, 129 Otani, Kozui, 446
Novikov, Nikolay Ivanovich, 266, 322, 604, Otto of Gemmingen, 108
697-698,778, 871-874, 889, 1168 Otto, Rudolf, 651
Numay722, 1127 Ouspensky, Piotr Dem’ianovich, 160, 446-447,
Numenius, 165, 413, 559, 842, 876, 1065, 451, 453, 714, 806-807, 848, 911-913, III,
TD Sanit 53 1144
Nufiez, Pedro, 301 Ovid, 211, 680
Nuysement, Clovis Hesteau de, 377, 537, 854, Owen, Richard, 965
883-884 Owen, Robert, 977
Nuysement, Jacques de, 537 Oxenbridge, Joanna, 967
Nyland, Willem, 453 Ozanam, Charles, 672
O’Brien, Henry, 632 Padgett, James E., 1108
O’Connell, Theresa, 548 Paganini, Niccold, 700
O’Sullivan, Seumas, see: Starkey, James Page, Eliot B., 487
Oaski, Olbracht, 1022 Pagel, Walter, 927
Obenberger, Johann Caspar, 890 Pagnini, Sante, 396
Oberkirch, Baroness d’, 910 Paine, Tom, 1077

--- Page 641 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS 127
Palaeopolitanus, Franciscus Evistor, see: More, Paulus of Tarento, 35
Henry Pauvert, Jean-Jacques, 238
Palchus, 116-117 Pauw, Cornelius de, 941
Paley, William, 824 Pauwels, Louis, 389, 453
Palladini, David Mario, r112 Pazder, Lawrence, 1036
Palladius, 906 Peale, Norman Vincent, 864
Pallis, Marco, 444, 909, 1134 Pearce, Alfred John, see: Zadkiel II
Palmer, Arthur Whitney, 455 Peck, William, 548
Palmroot, Johan, 1097 Pegius, Martin, 129
Pammenes, 22 Peiresc, Nicolas Claude Fabri de, 236, 666,
Pannikar, Raimundo, 324 668-669
Pansa, Mutius, 536 Péladan, Joseph-Aimé (Joséphin), 55, 359,
Pantaenus, 268 441-442, 645, 780, 816, 914-915, 938-939,
Pantheus, 320 1018, 1045
Paolini, Fabio, 613, 879 Péladan, Louis-Adrien, 938
Pape, Gilles le, 289 Pelagros, 26
Papini, Giovanni, 345 Pelliot, Paul, 446, 758
Pappos the Philosopher, 805 Penka, Carl, 91
Papus, 53, 95, 133, 163, 266, 334, 384, Penington, Isaac, 709
401-402, 441-442, 487, 540, 645, 647, 662, Pentland, John, 913
770, 778-782, 826, 888, 899-901, 906, Peppermiller, R., 165
913-915, 933, 948-949, 1018, 1063, 1080, Perisse-Duluc of Lyons, Jean-André, 604
FLL, T0137 116, Ie24er125 Perls, Frederick, 575-576, 578
Paracelsus, 13, 16, 19-20, 22, 27-29, 37, 40, Perna, Petrus, 320
43-44, 46, 53, 55, 74, 104, 131, 153-154, Pernety, Antoine-Joseph, 43, 47, 51, 329, 333;
174, 186-189, 216, 259-260, 262, 277, 288, 5515 597-599, 604, 854, 940-942, 1106,
302, 306, 320-322, 339, 364, 372, 433, 435, 1140
459-461, 469-473, 484, 538, 540, 543, 570, Pernety, Jacques, 597, 941
$72, $99, $975 605, 612-615, 623, 626, 632, Perrault, Francois, 201
644, 651, 662, 667, 697, 708, 715, 734, 736, Perrone Compagni, Vittoria, 7, 527
745, 788, 802, 869, 873, 884, 890, 892-893, Persio, Antonio, 1129
915-921, 922-931, 956, 958, IOIO-I012, Pessoa, Fernando, 283, 942-944
TOASs LOS 7746 O735) 1S Oyal 15 Oo, Os Oe Pestalozzi, Johann Heinrich, 591, 658
1180 Peter (founder of the Archontics), 89
Paramahamsa, Mahatma Agamya, 899 Peter I, Tsar of Bulgaria, 192
Paramelle, J., 493 Peter I, Tsar of Russia, 872
Paré, Ambroise, 435 Peter I, King, 243
Parkins, John, 163-164 Peter III, King of Aragon, 102
Parmenides, 30, 362 Peter of Abano, 1, 130, 163, 316, 525, 590, 644,
Parsons, Jack, 1047 646-647, 735-736, 746-747, 792, 927,
Parsons, John Whiteside, 904 944-947, 1137
Part, Arvo, 817 Peter of Castelnau, 244
Parthey, Gustav, 540 Peter the Venerable, 997
Paschalis Romanus, 513-514 Peters, Ted, 1144
Pascoli, Giovanni, 299, 359 Petersen, Johann Wilhelm, 467, 956
Pasqually, Martines de, 47, 204, 249-250, 257, Pététin, Jacques, 79, 161
263-266, 288-290, 332-334, 351, 386-387, Petrarch, Francesco, 798
461, 602-604, 629, 692, 742, 749, 770, 77735 Petri, Catharose de, 993, 1019
780, 782, 851, 854, 881, 931-936, Petriccione, Luigi, 782
1024-1027, 1029-1030, 1058, 1060, I171 Peucer, Caspar, 129
Pasquini-Montresson, Count of, 599 Peuckert, Will-Erich, 338-339, 886, 927
Passavant, Johann Carl, 80, 161, 661 Peuerbach, Georg, 129
Pasteur, Louis, 665 Peyrat, Napoléon, 827
Pater, Walter, 830 Pfaff, Wilhelm Andreas, 132
Patrizi, Francesco, I00-I01, 229, 484, 536-537, Pfefferkorn, Johannes, 990-991
539-540, 813, 842-844, 936-938, 947, 962, Pfister, Oskar, 1041
1128-1129 Phaneg, 949
Paul I, Tsar, 697, 872 Pherekydes of Syros, 166
Paul II, Pope, 679-680, 1134 Philastrius of Brescia, 500
Paul III, Paul, 129, 229, 391, 398, 1129 Philibert de Orme, 385, 1160
Paul IV, Pope, 971 Philip (Christian missionary), 1069
Paul of Alexandria, 116-117 Philip I, King of Spain, 936, 1021
Paul of Middelburg, 129-130, 134 Philipp II, Duke of Burgundy, 368-369
Paulhan, Jean, 1112 Philip IV, King of France, 257, 1058
Pauli, Wolfgang, 650 Philip V, King of Spain, 931
Paulus Julianus, 63 Philip Henry, 4th Earl of Stanhope, 204, 215

--- Page 642 ---
1218 INDEX OF PERSONS
Philip of the Palatinate, Count-Elector, 1138 Plato of Tivoli, 126
Philip of Tripoli, 316 Plessis-Mornay, Philippe du, 535
Philip Wilhelm, Duke of Neuburg, 465 Plethon, Giorgios Gemistos, 222, 362, 392, 707,
Philipon, René, 673, 1063 960-963, 984, 1127, 1182
Philippe, Anthelme-Nizier, 402, 780-782, 915, Pliny the Elder, 22, 24, 69, 91, 231, 254, 341,
947-949, 1063 719, 721, 831
Philo of Alexandria, to1, 165-166, 268, 335, Plotinus, 59, 70, 90, 221-222, 277, 305,
341, 414, 423, 567-568, 584, 635, 703, 802, 360-361, 363, 366, 406, 413, 423, 427-428,
805, 842, 964, 1128 439, 608-610, 647, 705-706, 721, 802, 812,
Philocomus, 1065 834-837, 841-845, 869, 953, 1065, 1128
Philolaos of Croton, 875 Plummer, George Winslow, 487
Philostratus, 118, 611, 721, 906 Plutarch, 91, 165, 362, 413, 617, 703, 794, 874,
Phoebron, see: Ecker und Eckhoffen, Hans STO LOS anal 26
Heinrich von Plutarch of Athens, 221, 363
Picart, B., 907 Podmore, Frank, 1080
Pico della Mirandola, Gianfrancesco, 254, Poe, Edgar Allen, 80, 438
611-612,944, 947, 1176 Poel, Marc van der, 7
Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni, 4, 7, 11, 60, Poer Trench, B. le, 714
LOO, 129,.131,.034, 157, B79, 29Os BANG L2s Point, Armand, 938
3395 3735 391, 395-396, 399, 483, 494, Poiret, Pierre, 104, 197, 261, 601, 957, 963-964
534-535, 611, 623-624, 628, 639, 641-642, Poisson, Albert, 53, 1063
671, 681, 687-688, 694, 696, 707-708, Polemon of Laodicea, 316
732-734, 736, 813, 843-844, 854, 880, 914, Polhem, Christopher, 1099
9275 937s 949-954, 962, 990-991, 993, 1060, Poliziano, Angelo, 611, 950
Ti 72 Ot LOZ. 1716 Pollux, 317, 793
Piérart, Z., 1080 Polybos, 19
Pierbolte, Lietaert, 542 Polycarp, 240, 252, 429,
Pierre d’Ailly, 8, 130, 954-955 Pomponazzi, Pietro, 11, 99, 735, 1176
Pigeaire, Léonide, 78 Poncé, Charles, 647
Pigghe, Albert, 129-130 Poncins, Leon de, 348
Pignatelli, Tommaso, 236 Pontano, Giovanni, 129-130, 134, 534, 681
Pignon, Laurent, 314 Pontard, Pierre, 601, 910
Pike, Albert, 387, 401, 644-645, 691, 712, Pontus de Tyard, 130, 813
1035 Ponzinibio, Gianfrancesco, 1176
Pindar, 719, 980-983, 1184 Pope, Alexander, 628
Pinedo, Thomas de, 670 Pordage, John, 46, 149, 261, 613, 666, 677-678,
Pines, S., 146 683-684, 869, 966-970, 1026
Pingree, David, 125, 516-518 Pordenone, 229
Pinturiccio, 483 Porete, Marghareta, 511
Pioda, Alfredo, 458 Porphyry, 28, 121, 130, 141, 221-222, 361, 363,
Pisani, Octavius, 466 365, 406, 420, 427-428, 496, 609-610, 618,
Pisotti, Paolo, 398 721-722, 725, 834-836, 845, 906, 961,
Pistorius, Johannes, 626, 646, 671, 1021-1022 1065-1066,1126, 1128
Pitois, Christian, see: Christian, Paul Porreta, Gilbert, 503
Pitra, Jean-Baptiste, 1133 Porta, Giovanni Battista, 44, 231, 234, 316, 670,
Pitys the Thessalian, 723 736
Pius I, Bishop of Rome, 1147 Portinari, Bice, 296
Pius II, Pope, 129 Posch, Maria Anna von, 76
Pius VI, Pope, 225 Poseidonius, 112, 116, 448
Placidus, 121-122, 126, 135 Post, Isaac, 1075
Plantard, Pierre, 828 Postel, Guillaume, 290, 301, 306, 359, 397, 536,
Plato, 4, 18, 26-28, 30, 94, 98-100, I11, 116, 624, 641, 686, 690, 710, 880, 965, 970-974,
126, 149, 219, 221-222, 231, 233, 240-241, 984, 1060, IIII-1162
254, 268, 276, 278, 293, 305, 327, 349, Potken, John, 391
360-366, 373-374, 397-399, 408-409, Potterton, R.A., 555
419-420, 427, 439, 475-476, 478, 481-483, Pountney, David, 308
485, 493, 497-498, 501, 506-507, 509, Pouvourville, Albert de, see: Matgioi
512-513, §32-534, 539, 556, 559-560, 567, Poyen, Charles, 78, 862
569, 589, 608, 610, 617, 628, 632, 649, 659, Poyet, Guillaume, 971
678, 687, 703, 705-708, 719-723, 732, 795, Pratapa, Bheema Sena, 899
802-803, 805, 809-810, 812, 834-835, Prato, Felice da, 396
837-839, 841-845, 874-876, 880, 884, Préau, Gabriel du, 376, 535, 682
916-917, 937, 953, 960-962, 964, 972, Preisendanz, Karl, 722
981-983, IOII, 1046, 1085, L100, Prel, Carl du, 338, 556
1126-1128, 1130-1132, 1149, I151, Preston, William, 383-384
1182-1184 Preziosi, Giovanni, 348

--- Page 643 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS 1219
Price, James, 45 Radev, Georgi, 309
Price, Richard, 293, 575 Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli, 785
Prideaux, Humphrey, 341 Raedt, Alhart de, 393
Prierias, Sylvester Mazzolini, 1176 Rael, 770
Priestly, Joseph, 45-46 Raffaele, Marco, 397-398
Principe, Lawrence M., 201, 339 Ragon de Bettignies, Jean-Marie, 540, 645, 941,
Printz, Thomas, 1094 976, 1130, 1159
Prisciani, Pellegrino, 129 Rahman, Fazlur, 609
Priscianus Lydus, 610 Rahn, Otto, 436, 827
Procida, Giovanni da, 505 Raine, Kathleen, 445, 908
Proclus, 59, 70, 130, 221-222, 312, 360-361, Rainsford, Charles R., 46, 51, 356-357, 1106
363, 365-366, 481, 509, 513, 608, 610, 617, Rakoczy II of Transylvania, Prince, 1022-1023
706, 721, 836-837, 840-845, 875-876, 962, Raleigh, A.D., 541
TO23 ,DL26—1 12:7, Raleigh, Walter, 304, 538, 570
Prodicus,404, 411, 429, 974-975 Ram, Sri N., 1122
Prokofieff, Serge, 1124 Ramanyja, 1181
Prophet, Elizabeth Clare, 1095-1096 Ramdas, Swami, 445
Prophet, Mark L., 1094-1095 Ramis de Pareja, Bartolomeo, 811
Provensal, Pierre, 1170 Ramsay, Michael de, 384-385, 484, 850
Prugg von Pruggenstein, Baron, 368 Ramsay, Sir Andrew (Le Chevalier), 293
Prunelle de Liére, Léonard Joseph, 288, 290, Ramus, Petrus, 301, 372, 918-919
603 Randolph, Paschal Beverly, 487, 540, 552,
Pryse, James Morgan, 3, 556 629-630, 743, 902, 966, 976-979, 1018,
Psellus, Michael, 22, 26, 193, 222, 361, 365, 1078-1079
489, 707, 961-962 Randonvilliers, Jean-Baptiste Richard de, 887
Ptolemaeus (Valentinian), 1144-1146, 1148, Rank, Otto, 577
T153-1154 Ranst, Margarite van, 469
Ptolemy, Claudius, 59, 112-113, 116-117, 120, Rantzau, Henry, 135, 747
122-124, 126, 130-1355 Lo 7.92nO, 220A Rantzow, Alexander, 356
417, 429, $13, 516, $23, 525, 714, 767, 813, Rantzow, George, 356
877, 945-946 Raphael (astrologer), 133
Ptolemy I Soter, 567 Raphael (painter), 1022-1023
Ptolemy III Euergetes, 567 Rapine, Paschal, 539
Pucci, Francesco, 232 Rapp, Johann Georg, 149
Pucci, Lorenzo, 391 Rasis, 316-317, 1055
Puech, Henri-Charles, 141, 1064-1065 Raspanti, Antonino, 953
Pulver, Max, 1040-1041 Ratdolt, Erhard, 124-125, 127
Pumfrey, Stephen, 915 Ratichius, 270
Pushkin, Alexander, 699, 1023 Ratke, Wolfgang, see: Ratichius
Puységur, Armand Marie Jacques Chastenet, Rauchfuss, Conrad, see: Dasypodius
Marquis de, 77, 79, 602, 822, 1025 Raven, Ernst Werner von, 368-369
Pypin, A.N., 872 Ray, John,143, 293
Pythagoras, 26, 30, 94, III, 220, 240, 293-294, Raymond V, Count of Toulouse, 243
305, 315-316, 326, 336, 351, 362, 365, 373; Raymond VII, Count of Toulouse, 244
398-399, 439, 467, 481, 483, 485, 534, 569, Reade, W.W., 180
673, 687, 703, 705, 707-708, 710-711, 713, Reagan, Ronald, 137
719, 723, 808, 810, 812, 844, 875, 937, Récamier, Juliette, 160
961-962, 980, 984, 988, 992-993, LOLI, Redfield, James, 654, 860
1031, 1045, IO§1, 1127-1128, 1131-1132, Redgrove, Herbert Stanley, 53
1134, 1137 Redon, Odilon, 673, 938
Redway, George, 632
al-Qabisi, 131 Rees, Simon, 308
Quercetanus, see: Duchesne, Joseph Regardie, Israel, 55, 283, 287, 550, 646-647,
Quimby, Phineas Pankhurst, 81, 573, 859, 862 TSA pLO93s Lit
Quinet, Edgar, 1003, 1005 Reghini, Arturo, 54, 345, 782, 979-980, 1039
Quint, Léon-Pierre, 439 Regino of Prim, 810
Quintilian, 606, 611, 795 Regiomontanus, 121, 129-131, 135, 294, 955
Quintscher, Wilhelm, 380 Régnier, Henri de, 1046
Quinones, Francisco, 396-397 Reich, Wilhelm, 574
Quispel, Gilles, 419, 541, 635, O71 Reichel, George von, 873
Quodvultdeus,98, 479, 494, 500-501, 503, 505, Reichenbach, Baron Karl von, 95, 555, 675, 886,
510, 521, 569, 838 1080
Reichstein, Herbert, 91, 95, 96, 675
R__va, Zenaida, see: Fadeyev, Helena Reid, Robert MacGregor, 831
Andreyevna de Reid, Thomas, 293
Rabelais, Francois, 8, 239, 483-484, 797, I161 Reinalter, Helmut, 592

--- Page 644 ---
1220 INDEX OF PERSONS
Reinhold, E., 131, 135, 138-139 Robertus Castrensis, see: Robert of Chester
Reisky, Francisca von, 148 Robertus Vallensis, 370
Reitzenstein, Richard, 541, 565 Rocamora, Isaac de, 670
Rettinensis, Robertus, see: Robert of Chester Roché, Déodat, 436, 827
Rembrandt van Rijn, 44 Rochefoucauld, Antoine de La, 938
Remond, Nicolas Frangois, 1130 Rochette, Jeane, 79, 602
Renéville, André Rolland de, 439 Rock, Johann Friedrich, 890, 957
Repnin, N., 698 Rocquetaillade, Jean de, 16, 28, 36-37, 102,
Rétif de La Bretonne, Nicolas-Edme, 250, 601, 320, 696, 922, 1007-1008, 1022
987-990 Rodriguez, Victor Manuel Gomez, see: Weor,
Retzel, 874 Samael Aun
Reuchlin, Johannes, 4, 6-7, 391, 624-625, Roerich, Nikolai Konstantinovich, 907
639-641, 687, 694, 707, 733-734, 813, 880, Roger, Abraham, 907
990-993, IOIO, 1135, 1158, 1162 Rogers, Carl, 573, 576
Reuss, Theodor, 108, 282-283, 402, 459, 692, Rohan, Karl Anton, 346
743, 853, 898-906,1089 Rohan, Louis René Edouard, 225
Revel, Gaston, 1046 Roignan, Elisabeth, 249
Rexroth, Kenneth, 575 Rolf, Ida, 576
Rhazes, 21-23, 28-29, 30-31, 35, 917 Rolland, Romain, 444
Rheticus, 131 Rollet, Clotilde, 202
Rhetorius, 116-117, 121, 124, 515 Rollet, Eugéne, 202
Ribbentrop, Joachim von, 323 Romanus, C. Iulius, 493
Ribemont-Dessaignes, Georges, 439 Ronikier, 598-599
Ribit, Jean, 919 Ronsard, Pierre de, 319, 623, 687, 813
Ricci, Agostino, 4, 396 Rops, Félicien, 938
Ricci, Paulo, 4, 687, 734 Rorschach, Hermann, 661
Richard of Fournival, rz Roscher, W.-H., 882
Richardiére, Francois-Louis la, 598-599 Rosenbach, Johann Georg, 958
Richardson, Pamela, 326 Rosenberg, Wilhelm von, 662
Richelieu (Armand Jean du Plessis), 129, 236 Rosenstock, Samuel, see: Tzara, Tristan
Richet, Charles, 79 Rosenthal, Marie Rosalie, 792
Richmond, Cora, 1077 Rosenzweig, Franz, 1040
Richter, Gregor, 185-186, 190-191 Rosler, Gottlieb Friedrich, 822
Richter, Johann Paul Friedrich, see: Jean Paul Ross, Harry, 1047
Richter, Samuel, see: Sincerus Renatus Rof&berg, Alfred, 596
Ricolfi, A., 359 Rosseli, Hannibal, 313, 536, 708
Riedel, Albert Richard, see: Albertus, Frater Rossetti, Gabriele, 298-299, 359, 436
Riffard, Pierre A., 336, 715 Rossi, Paolo, 154, 737
Rigaud de Branchiis, Johannes, 682 Roth, Johannes, 398
al-Rijal, ‘Ali b. Abi, 121, 125 Rothe, Richard, 892
Rijckenborgh, Jan van, 329, 436, 542, 686, 827, Rothermere, Lady, 913
993-994, 1019 Roth-Scholtz, Friedrich, 47, 485
Rijnberk, Gérard van, 604, 775-776, 931, 933, Rottenstern, Count von, 177
eLws Rougemont, Denis de, 271
Rilke, Rainer Maria, 323, 446, 1023 Rougié, M., see: Néroman, D.
Rimbaud, Arthur, 345, 438-440 Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 249, 434, 591, 601,
Rio, Martin del, 469, 612 658, 665, 697, 941, 987-988
Riolan, Jean, 917-919 Roussel, R., 879
Ripa, Cesare, 798 Row, Subba, 553, 1120
Ripley, George, 43, 46 Roy, Bruno, 11
Ristori, 131, 134 Roy, Rammohun, 907-908
Ritman, Joost R., 542, 958 Rozmberk, Vilém, 303-304, 1022
Ritter, Johann Wilhelm, 264, 433, 823, 825, 869, Rudhyar, Dane, 138-139
994-996,1005, 1042 Ridiger, Andreas, 1100
Rivail, Hypolyte Léon Denizard, 1080 Rudolf Il of Habsburg, Emperor, 45, 129, 188,
Riviera, Cesare Della, 390, 665, 672 207, 303, 306, 469, 597, 710, 747-748, 965,
Riviére, Patrick, 55, 390 1021-1022, 1160
Roach, Richard, 684 Rudolph, Kurt, 404
Robel, Marie, 148 Ruelle, C.E., 289
Robert of Chester, 23, 27, 31, 60, 256, 519, 662, Ruffin, Mr., 264, 911
746, 997, 1000 Ruggeri, Cosma, 129
Robert of Ketton, see: Robert of Chester Ruland, Martin Jr., 1021
Robert of Melun, 501 Ruland, Martin Sr., 021, 1057
Roberti, Jean, 469-470 Rumi, Jalal al-Din, 849
Roberts, Dorothy Jane, 846, 857, 864, Runge, Philipp Otto, 823
997-1000 Rupert of the Palatinate, 465

--- Page 645 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS 1221
Rupescissa, Johannes de, see: Rocquetaillade, Salzmann, Alexandre de, 441, 446-447
Jean de Salzmann, Jeanne de, 446-447, 450, 452-453
Ruppert, Hans-Jurgen, 1108 Sambucus, Joannes, 1021
Ruska, Julius, 31, 147, 529, 531-532 Sancroft, William, 291
Russell, Flora, 540 Sancto Bartolomeo, Paulinus a, 907
Russell, George W., 2-3, 555-557, 1022, 1179 Sand, George, 689, 778, 1003-1004
Russell, Peter, 113.4 Sanders, Alex, 830
Russell, Violet, 557 Sanders, Maxine, 830
Russo, Baruchia, 356 Sangro di San Severo, Raimondo di, 782,
Ruysbroeck, Jan van, 95, 312, 675, 688 1033-1035
Ruzbehan Baqli, 359 Santos, D., 124-125
Ryckel, Denis, 312 Sanudo, Marin, 395
Rydelius, Andreas, rro0 Sarachaga, Alexis de, 1133
Ryvers, Count, 505 Sarak, Albert de, 162
Rziha, Franz, 1160 Sarasin, Jacob, 666
Sardou, Victorien, 658
Sacconi, Raynier, 194, 246 Sarton, George, 14
Sacrobosco, Giovanni, 130, 506, 526, 791 Sasportas, Howard, 140
Sade, Donatien Alphonse Francois, Marquis de, Sass, Roselis von, 437
238 Satie, Erik, 816, 938
Sadeler, Aegidius, ro21 Satornilus, 411, 423, 429-430, 1037-1038
Sahib, Nana, 1077 Satter, Beryl, 863
al-Sahli, Aba ’I-Hasan al-Sahl b. Muhammad Saubert, Johann, 956
(al-Suhayli), 147 Sauer, Marie-Elisabeth, 1032
Sailer, Johann Michael, 327 Saul, Barnabas, 303, 811, 815, 958, 964, 1075
Saint Leon, Martin, 1160 Saumaise, Cl., see: Salmasius
Saint-André, de, 256, 738, 934 Sauniere, Berenger, 827-828
Saint-Georges de Marsai, Charles-Hector de, Savaléte de Lange, 279
262, 325-326, 603, 890 Savery, Roelant, 1o21.
Saint-Germain, Le Comte de, 46, 216, 344, 537, Savolino, Fraulissa, 206
587-588, 686, 715, 816, 891, 940, 1005, Savonarola, Girolamo, 134, 361, 611, 954,
1022-1024, 1058, 1093-1095, 1159 TIO BELL GAS)
Saint-Hilaire, Barthélemy, 907 Savonarola, Michele, 316
Saint-Martin, Louis-Claude de, 47, 52, 108, Savoret, André, 54, 238
148-149, 152, 161-162, £86, 204, 215, Saxl, Fritz, 518
ZAI—-250, 259, 202-2075 280, 290,15 22,, Saxo Grammaticus, 92
325-3275 3325 3345 351, 387, 439, 5435 594, Sayf, al-Dawlah, 125
601-605, 613, 643, 645, 647, 665, 676, Scabelloni, Adelina, 1039
697-698, 712, 750, 770-771, 776, 778-780, Scabelloni, Antonio, see: Scaligero, Massimo
782, 816, 824, 854, 874, 881, 910-911, 914, Scaglia, Deodato, 1177
932-935, 948-949, 988, 996, 1000-1006, Scaliger, Joseph Justus, 129, 375
1023, 1024-1031, 1033, 1042, 1058, 1060, Scaligero, Massimo, 436, 1038-1039
TO OG MREL2Anat FO-e OS, Tela tt lem Scargill, Daniel, 292
Saint-Simon, Claude Henri de Rouvroy, Comte Scarlatti, Domenico, 816
de, 673 Scarpa, Vincenzo, see: Filalete, Niceforo
Saint Victor, Richard of, 359, 688 Scévole, 250
Saint-Yves d’Alveydre, Joseph Alexandre, 163, Schaubert, Johan, 537
217, 354, 645, 781, 816, 908, 913, 915, Schaya,Leo, 444, 647, 1133
1031-1032, 1045-1046, IIII Scheffler, Johann, 105, 957
Sailr, 645 Scheible, Johann, 540
Sakharov, Andrei, 966 Scheler, Max, 825
Salin, Claude, 5 Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von, 47,
Salio of Padua, 515 148, 152-153, 191, 264, 347, 433, 605, 643,
Salle, Antoine de la, 605 661, 712, 778, 788, 823-825, 869, 892, 994,
Sallwigt, Gregorius Anglus, see: Welling, Georg 996, LOOO-I00T, 1003-1005, 1039-1040,
von T1042, 1085, 1178-1179,L181
Salmanas, 26 Schemit, Jean, 238
Salmasius, 13 5 Schemua, Blasius von, 694
Salmon, G., 168, 940 Schenke, Hans Martin, 407, 417, 1064, 1066
Salome (follower of Jesus), 240 Schiller, Friedrich, 433, 605, 787, 869, 891
Saltzmann, Frédéric Rodolphe, 264-265, 603, Schlag, Oscar Rudolf, 1040-1042
676, 1025, 1032-1033 Schlegel, August Wilhelm von, 149, 778, 907,
Saltzmann, Jean Rodolphe, 1032 1005
Salvaticis, Porchetus de, 391 Schlegel, Friedrich von, 153, 605, 643-644, 660,
Salverte de loux, J.-L:, 51 712, 825, 869, 907, 994, I00O-1004
Salviati, Georgius Benignus, 391 Schleiermacher, Friedrich, 661, 845, L001, 1004

--- Page 646 ---
1222 INDEX OF PERSONS
Schleis von Lowenfeld, Bernhard Joseph, rors Scott, Walter, 132, 477-478, 487-488, 493-494,
Schmid, Conrad, 327 498, 541, 560-561, 786
Schmid, Louis, 52 Scotus, Johannes Duns, 123, 678
Schmidt von Sonnenberg, Johann Heinrich, see: Scovoroda, 874
Fictuld, Hermann Scriabin, Alexander, 816
Schmidt, Carl, 417-418, 759 Scriptoris, Rolandus, 318
Schmidt, Ch., 244 Seale, E.A., 555
Schmidt, Hans, see: Fictuld, Hermann Sebastian, King of Portugal, 943
Schmidt-Biggemann, Wilhelm, 1125-1126 Sebottendorff, Rudolf Freiherr von, 96, 848
Schmitt, Carl, 346 Secundinus, 142
Schmitt, Charles, 99, 1128-1130 Secundus, 1145-1146, 1148
Schmitz, Oscar, 139 Sedacer, Guillaume, 1061-1063
Schneider, Joseph Anton, see: BO Yin Ra Séde, Gérard de, 828
Schneiderfranken, Joseph Anton, see: B6 Yin Ra Sédir, Paul, 441, 645, 701, 819, 826, 914,
Schoenberg, Arnold, 815-817 948-949, 1063
Schofield, Mary, 1165 Seebeck, Thomas Johann, 995
Scholem, Gershom G., 108, 271, 356, 634-635, Sejestani, Abu Yakub, 271
637-638, 641, 644-647, 818, 953, 992 Selenus, Gustavus, see: August II of
Scholer, D.M., 419-420 Braunschweig-Liineburg, Duke
Schoner, Johann, see: Carlostadius Séligny, Paul de, 849
Schonerer, Georg von, 693 Selva, H.,133, £36
Schonfeld, Thomas von, 107 Séménoff, Marc, 1113
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 83, 186, 191, 825, 986, Semler, Johann Salomon, 45, 368, 551
1181 Senckenberg, Johann Christian, 959
Schoppe, Kaspar, 234 Sendigovius, Michael, 44, 884, 865, 1021, 1158
Schott, Kaspar, 668, 737 Senior Zadith, 21-22, 29, 30, 32
Schoudy, Baron, rors Sennert, Daniel, 43-44
Schrenck-Notzing, Albert, to40 Séon, Alexandre, 938
Schrick, Michael, 38 Sepharial, 132
Schroder, FJ.W., 45, 47, 485, 551, 1015 Sérant, Paul, 442
Schroer, Karl Julius, 1084-1085 Serapion of Thmuis, 758, 1066
Schubert, Gotthilf Heinrich von, 80, 264, 613, Serlio, Sebastiano, 229
648, 660-661, 823-825, 892, 994, 1005, Serrarius, Petrus, 670
1042-1043 Servadio, Emilio, 345
Schucman, Helen, 857 Sevananda, Sri, 770
Schudt, Johann Jacob, 642 Severinus, Petrus, 43, 320, 918
Schukowsky, W.A., 699 Sevi, Sabbatai, 107, 356-357, 670
Schuller, Robert, 864, 1094 Sezgin, Fuat, 531-532
Schulze, Werner, 817 Seznec, Jean, 518
Schuon, Frithjof, 266, 444, 709, 807, 819, 848, Sforza, Alessandro, 129, 679
909, 1043-1044, 1132-1133 Shaftesbury, Lord (Athony Ashley Cooper), 293
Schuré, Edouard, 95, 266, 329, 342, 485, 714, Shah, Idries, 847-848
1045, 1085, 1089, 1132 Shakespeare, William, 155, 215, 308, 456, 943,
Schittler, Hermann, 594-595 1059
Schiitz, Christoph, 1167 Shallcrass, Philip, 832
Schitz, Johann Jakob, 890 Shankaracarya, 1181
Schutz, Maria Katharina, 890 Shantideva, 183
Schutz, William, 576 Shaw, George Bernard, 170
Schwaller, René Adolphe, 8, 389-390, 882, Sheldon, Archbishop Gilbert, 292
1045-1046 Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 551, 829, 1000
Schwartz, I.-G., 872-873 Shemesh, Ara Ben, 1092-1093
Schwartz-Bostunitsch, Gregor, 675 Shorter, Thomas, 1080
Schwarz, Berthold, 37 Shushtari, 532
Schweitzer, Albert, 448 Sibelius, Jan, 816
Schweitzer, Johann Frederich, see: Helvetius, Sibly, Ebenezer, 46, 51, 163
Johann Frederich Siderocrates, 320, 642
Schwenkfeld, Caspar, 104, 460, 920-921, 957, Sidgwick, Henry, 79
1026, 1073 Sidney, Philip, 303, 535
Schwetschke, C.A., 458 Sidney-Smith, William, 355
Sclavione, Constanzo de, 944 Siena, Sisto da, 6, 399
Scot, Reginald, 1177 Sigismund of Austria, Archduke, 1176
Scot, Sedulius, 501 Sigismund of Seeon, 1138
Scott, Cora Linn Victoria, 1077 Sigismund, Emperor, 37, 40
Scott, Cyril, 816 Silberer, Herbert, 52
Scott, Thomas, 170 Silferhielm, Baron, 1025

--- Page 647 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS 1223
Silva e Menezes, Joao da, 625 Spener, Philipp Jacob, 75, 103, 392, 890, 892,
Silvester II, Pope, 123, 126 Ds)
Silvius, Willem, 302 Spengler, Oswald, 346
Sima, Joseph, 438-439 Sperber, Julius, 261, 636
Simeon the New Theologian, 223 Speusippus, 876
Simmel, Georg, 1050 Spinoza, Baruch, 153, 448, 466, 643, 671, 823,
Simon bar Yoahi, Rabbi, 991 989, I100
Simon of Pharés, 129, 732 Spizelius, Theophilus, 1129
Simon Magus, 251-252, 330, 401, 426, Spranger, Bartolomaeus, 1021
428-430, 633, 770, 786-787, 1069-1073, Sprenger, Jacob, 1176
1136, 1146 Sprick, Jurgen, 438
Simon of Montfort, 244 Springer, Christophe, 941
Simon, Johann Friedrich, 591 Spurge, Caroline, 678
Simonides of Ceos, 793-794 Squyer, Stebyn Scrope, 505
Simplicius, 98, 758, 945 Stabili, Francesco, see: Ascoli, Cecco d’
Sincerus Renatus, 262, 266, 551, 993, Stabius, 129
LOT4—LOLrS, LO73—=fo7A4 L167 Stack, Herbert J., 1118
Sinclair, Henry John, 447 Stadius, Johannes, 129, 135, 514
Sinnett, A.P., 171, 177-178, 181, 337, Staél, Germaine de, 778, 1005
553-556, 664, 714, 907, 1023, 1085, Stafford, Lord, 53
II16-1119 Stahelin, H., 168, 940
Siragusa, Eugenio, 1143 Stahl, Georg Ernst, 44-45, 958
Sivers, Marie von, 1088-1089 Stalin, Joseph, 966
Sixtus IV, Pope, 129, 680 Stalnaker, L., 882
Sixtus V, Pope, 130, 316, 319, 399 Stanley, Michael W., 1108
Skynner, Robin, 453 Stanley, Thomas, 336
Slade, Henry, 1081 Stapleton, H.E., 147
Slavson, Samuel Richard, 453 Star, Ely, 133
Sloane, Hans, 1022 Starbuck, Edwin, 573
Smeeth, W.F.,, 555 Starck, J.A., 697, 852
Smith, A., 939 Starhawk, 831
Smith, Héléne, 1140 Starkey, George, 14, 46, 200, 238, 330,
Smith, Huston, 444, 1133 1082-1084
Smith, John, 291 Starkey, James, 556-557
Smith, Joseph, 300 Stassart, Marie de, 469
Smith, Michelle, 1036 Stauff, Philipp, 96
Smith, Morton, 242 Stausberg, Michael, 1127, 1183
Smith, Pamela Colman, 1112, 1164 Stead, William Thomas, 170
Smith, R.C., see: Raphael Stedman, John Gabriel, 173
Smith, Wilfred Talbot, 904 Steen, Jan, 44
Smith, William, 356 Stefano, Giovanni di, 494
Socinus, Faustus, 710 Steffens, Henrik, 823, 1005
Sohrawardi, 271, 960-961 Steiger, Isabelle de, 52-53, 553-554
Solazareff, 56 Stein, Aurel, 446, 758
Soler, Amalia Domingo, 1081 Stein, Baron von, 1032
Solomon ibn Gabirol, 122 Stein, Charlotte von, 1015
Solovyov, Vladimir, 153, 219-220, 266, 699, Stein, Diane, 343
970, 1040, 1181 Stein, Madame von, 1032
Sommering, S.T. von, 45-46 Stein, Walter Johannes, 436
Soncino, Gersom, 395, 647 Steiner, Rudolf, 54, 82-89, 160, 267, 342, 347,
Sophie, Duchess of Hanover, 464-465, 467 434, 436, 457, 463, 554, 615, 630, 648, 652,
Sotheran, Charles, 5 52 702, 714, 807, 816, 825, 827, 899-900, 921,
Soulés, Georges, see: Abellio, Raymond 986, 1018, 1038-1039, 1045, 1084-1091,
Soumet, Alexandre, 1003 1092, 1121, 1123-1124
South, Thomas, 52, 553 Stellatus, 538, 874
Southern, R.W., 838 Stepan Thomas, King, 194
Southey, Robert, 163 Stephanos of Alexandria, 22, 26
Souza-Fontés, de, 852 Stephen of Messina, 516
Spalding, Baird T., 588 Stern, Meir, 670
Spangenberg, August Gottlieb, 890 Sternhals, Johann, 40
Spare, Austin Osman, 905 Sterry, Peter, 291
Spedalieri, Giuseppe, 553 Steuco, Agostino, 361, 534, 708, 711,
Spee, Friedrich von, 1177 1129-1130, 1134
Spence, Lewis, 831 Stewart, Gary L., ro1g
Spencer, Edmund, 484, 538, 713 Stirner, Max, 347

--- Page 648 ---
1224 INDEX OF PERSONS
Stjernvall, Leonid Robertovich de, 446 Tauler, Johannes, 72, 105, 151, 312, 469, 802,
Stobaeus, Johannes, 118, 489, 492, 496-497, 840, 963, 1033, 1087, 1165
534, 540-541,559, 561 Tavener, John, 817
Stockham, Alice Bunker, 863 Taxil, Léo, 579, 1035-1036
Stockhausen, Karlheinz, 817 Taylor, John, 329
Stoczkowski, Wiktor, 1141 Taylor, Thomas, 173, 541, 632, 844-845, 882
Stoddart, C.M., 550, 1092-1093 Téder, Charles, 402, 780
Stoddart, William, 444 Tedeschi, John, 1177
Stoeffler, Johann, 129-130 Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre, 652
Stoimenoy, Todor, 309 Telesio, Bernardino, 231-232
Stokeslay, John, 397 Telle, Joachim, 918
Stok-Huyser, Henny, see: Petri, Catharose de Teniers, D., 44
Stolberg-Rofsla, J.M. Graf zu, 592 Tennemann, Wilhelm Gottlieb, 845
Stoltzius von Stoltzenberg, Daniel, 41 Tennyson, Alfred, Lord, 829
Stoughton, Israel, 1082 Terraille, Marguerite de, 254
Strabo, 91, 906 Terrasson, Abbé Jean, 329, 387, 1046
Strachov, P., 697 Tersteegen, Gerhard, 455, 551, 957-959
Strada, Anna Maria, 1022 Tertullian, 164, 228, 242, 251, 314, 422,
Strada, Jacopo, 1021 429-430, 492, 500, 567, 725, 765-767, 787,
Strada, Ottavio, 1021-1022 867, 877, 895-896, 974-975, 1064,
Stratiotics, 194, 868 1145-1147,1153, 1155
Strauss, David Friedrich, 84, 661 Thabit ibn Qurra, 515, 521, 523-525, 730,
Strindberg, August, 986 945-946
Stroumsa Guy G., 141-142, 330, 635, 818, Thales, 26
1052, 1061, 1066 Thayer, E., 1179
Stuart, Charles, 332, 932 Thémanlys, Louis M., 1113
Stukeley, William, 831 Theobald, R.M., 548, 656
Suavius, Leo, see: Gohory, Jacques Theodas, 1147
Suchten, Alexander von, 13 Theodore bar Konai, 141, 897, 1065
Sudhoff, Karl, 922 Theodore II (son of Manuel II Paleologos), 960
Sugrue, Thomas, 248 Theodore of Asinea, 876
al-Suhayli, see: al-Sahli Theodoret, 868, 895, 939, 1065-1066,
Suhrawardi, 267, 532, 609 I146-1147
Suidas, 317 Theodoric of Chartres, 479, 501, 506, 510
Sunderland, La Roy, 1077 Theodorus, 242
Surya,55 Theodotus, 268, 405, 417, 1144-1146, 1148,
Suso, Heinrich, roro 1154-1155
Sutich, Anthony, 574 Theon of Smyrna, 365, 876
Suzuki, Daisetz Teitaro, 323, 346, 907-908 Théon, Max, 148, 163, 173, 486-487,
Swedberg, Jesper, 1097, 1099 III2-1114
Swedenborg, Emanuel, 52, 95, 173, 175, 198, Theophilus of Edessa, 117, 124
202, 250, 260, 263-265, 267, 271-272, 278, Theophilus Presbyter, 23
300-301, 307, 322, 325, 356-357, 439, 600, Theophrastos, 26, 69
602, 604-605, 629, 631-632, 642, 659-660, Theophylact, 192
675-676, 690, 700, 709-711, 778-789, 793, Theosebeia, 25, 1184
816, 854, 859, 862, 888-889, 892, 908, Théot, Cathérine, 910
941-942, 957, 988, 1000, 1002, 1025, 1033, Theotimus, 1146
1040, 1077, LO96—-1105, 1106-1109, Thessalus of Tralles, 118, 514
LLZO—1 130, LL40; br8o Thevet, André, 8
Swift, Jonathan, 239 Thierry of Chartres, 169, 276, 803, 838-839
Swinburne, Algernon Charles, 829 Thimus, Albert von, 817
Syncellus, Georgius, 477 Tholde, Johann, 48
Synesius, 22, 26, 361, 365, 401-402, 442, 608, Thoma, Hans, 198
610-611 Thomas, John, 449
Szebeni, Melchior, 36 Thomas of Celano, 610
Szekely, Edmond Bordeaux, 3 43 Thomas of York, 506, 510-512
Thomas of Cantimpré, 35
Tatel, RL. 4107 Thomas, Alexandre, see: Mandres
Taifacos, I.G., 493 Thomas, Keith, 887, 1175
Tardieu, Michel , 413, 418, 529, 836, Thomas, Margaret, 1121
1064-1065 Thomé, Marquis de, 356, 605
Tardy de Beaufort, Baron, 599 Thompson, Garry Maguire, 858
Tassel, George W. van, 1142 Thorndike, Lynn, 11, 124, 126, 154, 158, 289,
Tasso, Torquato, 229, 936 338
Tatian,761, 1147 Thorsson, Edred, 833
Tatischey, P., 873 Thory, Claude-Antoine, 976

--- Page 649 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS 1225
Thou, Jacques Auguste de, 375 Tschoudy, Baron de, 47, 387, 551
Thrasyllus, 112, 115-116 Tucci, Giuseppe, 349, 908
Thun, Joseph von, 108, 327, 676 Tuccia, Nicola della, 1110
Thune, Nils, 394, 683-684, 970 Tucholsky, Kurt, 789
Thurneysser, Leonhard, 302, 869 Turgieneiy, I.P., 697, 874
Tiberius, Emperor, 112, 114, 116, 766 Turkheim, Bernard de, 603
Tieck, Ludwig, 148, 153, 947, 1002 Turkheim, Jean de, 603, 1032
Tiedemann, Dietrich, 539, 643, 869 Turnébe, Adrien, 376, 489, 535
Tieman, Friedrich von, 604 Turner, J.D., 412, 1064, 1066-1067
Tiffereau, T., 53 Turquet de la Mayerne, Theodore, 919
Tignonville, Guillame de, 505 Turrell, Pierre, 955
Tignosi da Foligno, Niccola, 610 Tutmosis III, Pharaoh, 692, 1020
Tilak, Lokamanya Bal Gangadhar, 172 Tuveson, Ernest Lee, 540
Till, Walter C., 418 Tylor, Edward Burnett, 278, 713, 716-718, 738
Tillich, Paul, 573 Tymme, Thomas, 920
Tilton, Robert, 1094 Tzara, Tristan, 345
Tingley, Katherine, 458, 556, 1119-1120 Tzurillas, John, 192
Tiryakian, Edward A., 887
Titi, Placido, 131-132, 134-135 Ulfilas, 94
Titian (Tiziano Vecellio), 229 Ullmann, Manfred, 529-532
Titus Lucretius Carus, 19 Ulma, Corrado di, 398
Toland, John, 709, 831, 1034 Ulmannus, 37, 40
Tolkien, J.R.R., 1111 Ulrich of Strasbourg, 509-510, 840
Tolstoi, Leo N., 699 Ulrika Eleonora, Queen of Sweden, 1099
Tomberg, Valentin, 267, 376, 819, 1111, Ulstadt, Philipp (Ulstadius), 38, 917
1123-1125 Umail, Ibn, see: Senior Zadith
Tomlinson, Gary, 812 Undereyck, Theodor, 956
Toomer, Nathan Pinchback, 447 Underhill, Ann Lea, 1075
Torquemada, Tomas de, 194 Underhill, Evelyn, 549
Tory, Geoffroy, 214, 290 Urban IV, Pope, 9
Toscanelli, Paolo, 294 Urban VIII, Pope, 130, 236, 812
Tour (or Latour) de la Case, de la, 933 Ursinus, Johann Heinrich, 392, 537, 1129
Tourgeney, Ivan, 873 Urso, 19
Tourniac, Jean, 1133 Usener, H., 882
Touzay-Duchanteau, 51 Uzés, Robert d’, 1008
Townshend, Chauncey Hare, 80, 214-215
Townshend, Pete, 817 Vadianus, Joachim, 925
Toxites, Michael, 918 Vailland, Roger, 438
Toynbee, Gibbon, 701 Vairano, Teofilo da, 206
Tracol, Henriette, 447 Valentine, Basil, see: Basilius Valentinus
Tradescant, John, 106 Valentinus, 228, 240, 251, 268, 401, 406, 412,
Trajan, 330 414, 417, 422, 426, 429, 491, 582, 585,
Tranker, Heinrich, 379, 904 769-770, 975, 1064, 1144-1146, 1147-1148,
Tranker, Hermann, 283 II49-I1I50, 1153-1155
Trapp, Dr. 678 Valeriano, Pierio, 797-798
Trapp, Ernst Christian, 591 Valla, Giorgio, 134, 841
Trent. WGs1335) 1009 Valli, L., 299, 359
Trentowski, B.F, 1179 Vallicrosa, José Millas, 126
Trevelyan, George, 324, 1134 Valliére, Mme de la, 327
Trevisanus, Bernardus, 891 Vallin, Georges, 444
Trevisarus, Gottfield Reinhold, 823 Vallotton, Felix, 938
Trine, Ralph Waldo, 863 Valori, Filippo, 360
Trismosin, Salomon, 34, 40, 43, 48, 54 Valsan, Michel, 848
Tristan, Flora, 689-690 Van-Anderson, Helen, 863
Trithemius, Johannes, 4, 7, 46, 273, 302-303, VandenBroeck, André, 389-390
306, 320-321, 435, 537» 540, $45, 5725 Varano, Fabrizio da, 679
622, 624-625, 694, 725, 733-736; 7435 Varano, Giulio Cesare da, 679
745, 886, 927, 944, 947, 1058, 1135-1139, Varignon,Paul, 1098
1158 Varille, Alexandre, 1046
Triveth, Nicholas, 511 Varley, Isabella Pollexfen, 555
Trobe-Bateman, Frederic Foster la, 158 Varley, John, 174, 215, 217
Troubezkoy, Nicolas, 873 Varnhubler, Karl von, 788
Trouillard, Jean, 834 Varro, 73, 314; 318, 477,722, 726, 746
Trungpa, Chogyam, 908 Vasoli, Cesare, 339
Tschesch, Hans Dietrich von, 890 Vaucroze, Marquis of, 603
Tschesch, Johann Theodor, 957 Vaughan, Henry, 1157

--- Page 650 ---
1226 INDEX OF PERSONS
Vaughan, Thomas, 46, 82, 345, 551, 570, 802, Wachter, Johann Georg, 341, 643
844, 865, 1157-1159 Wachtmeister, Constance, 182, 458
Vauquelin de La Fresnaye, Jean, 687 Wagenseil, Johann Christoph, 670
Vay, Adelma von, 1081 Wagner, Richard, 93, 96, 436, 464, 816, 826,
Vaz de Camoens, Luis, 218 986, 1045, 1181
Vegerius, Angelos, 535 Wahshiya, Ibn, 290
Ventura, Gastone, 782 Waite, Arthur Edward, 13, 52-53, 436, 541,
Venturini, Karl Heinrich, 342 548-550, 555, 570, 646, 691-692, 748, 785,
Vere, Ketmia, 1168 1035, LO9I-1093, IIII-III2, 1164-1165
Vereno, Ingolf, 531-532 Waite, Charles F, 1164
Vergez, Raoul, 1161 Walcher of Malvern, 123
Vernadsky, Vladimir Ivanovich, 448 Walden, Paul, torg
Vernetti-Vaucroze, Marquis, 599 Walker, Daniel Pickering, 254, 613, 812-813,
Versluis, Arthur, 394, 684, 715, 970 £1275 1129
Vertot, Abbé René Aubert de, 850 Wallace, Catherine, 462
Vesalius, Andreas, 918 Wallis, John, 291
Vettius Valens, 112-113, 115-118 Walter, Balthasar, 186
Viatte, Auguste, 338, 741, 9II Wannieck, Oskar Friedrich, 694
Vickers, Brian, 278, 887 Warburton, William, 280, 1046
Vico, Giambattista, 280, 710-712 Ward, Jane, see: Lead(e), Jane
Victorinus, Marius, 413, 428, 836, 1065 Ward, Schildknapp, 683
Vida, Girolamo, 322 Ward, William, 632
Vieussens, Raymond, 921 Ware, Mary, 1112
Vigenére, Blaise de, 289-290 Warnerius of Basel, sor
Vignon, Claude, 689-690 Washington, George, 587, 1047
Vigny, Alfred de, 1003 Wasserstrom, Steven M., 339, 615
Villard de Honnecourt, 1159-1162 Watts, Alan, 575
Villars, Abbot, 854 Webb, James, 339, 888
Villefranche, Morin de, 129 Weber, Arthur, 458, 694
Villeneuse, Marie, 971 Webern, Anton von, 816-817
Villiers de l’Isle-Adam, Jean Marie Mathias Webster, Nesta, 356
Philippe Auguste, 914 Wecker, J.J., 44
Vincent of Beauvais, 21, 35 Wedekind, Franz, 789
Vinci, Leonardo da, 449, 611, 828 Wedelius, G.W., 869
Vineti, Jean, 1176 Wedgwood, James Ingall, 686, rr21
Vintras, Eugene, 402, 579 Weekes, Charles, 555
Violante of Wittelsbach, Princess, 1023 Wegman, Ita, rogt
Violle, Jules, 390 Wehrmann, Frodi Ingolfson, 95, 675
Viollet le Duc, Eugéne Emmanuel, 1159 Weiditz, H., 44
Virgil, 169, 229, 721, 726, 798, 882 Weigel, Valentin, 46, 104, 186-189, 260, 460,
Virio, Luciana, see: Scabelloni, Adelina 5455 554, 873, 920-921, 930, 956-957, 1026,
Virio, Paolo M., 1039 1073, 1165-1166
Vischer, Friedrich Theodor, 1085 Weiler, Baron Georg A. von, 1172
Vital, Chaiim, 466, 670-671, 890 Weinfurter, K., 789
Viterbo, Annius of, 687 Weingarten, Henry, 140
Viterbo, Egidio da, 9, 391, 395-396, 880, Weininger, Otto, 345, 347
I162-1164 Weinreich, O., 882
Vitruvius, 1160 Weishaupt, Adam, 107-108, 326, 590-595, 601,
Vittorio, 309 676, 899
Vivekananda, Swami (Narendranath Dutta), 646, Weiss, Theresa, 326
908 Weissensee, Philipp Heinrich, 889
Vivenza, Jean-Marc, 778 Weisser, Ursula, 531
Voigt, Christian Gottlieb von, 596 Weisthor, Karl, see: Wiligut, Karl Maria
Voisin, Catherine La, 1035 Welling, Georg von, 47, 108, 132, 262, 266,
Volkoff, Boris Vsevolod, 806 4335 551, 662, 741, 959, 1166-1168
Vollmann, Herbert, 437-438 Wense, Wilhelm von, 74
Vollrath, Hugo, 458 Wentworth, Kate, 458
Volpe, G., 242 Weor, Samael Aun, 1020
Volpierre, V.L., 55 Werner, A.G., 1042
Voltaire, 132, 614, 710, 987-988 Werner, Zacharias, 778
Vorilhon, Claude, see: Raél Wesendonck, Mathilde, 1045
Voysey, Charles, 170 Wesley, John, 1104
Vredeman de Vries, Jan, 662 Westcott, William Wynn, 308, 541, 545-549,
Vries, Adriaen de, 1021 554-555, 646-647, 664, 671, 783-784, 899,
Vuillaud, Paul, 779 1093, 1168-1170

--- Page 651 ---
INDEX OF PERSONS 1227
Westfall, Richard S., 339 Winckler, J., 956
Westman, Robert S., 542 Winther, Joseph A., 1047
Weston, Jesse, 436 Winthrop, John, 1082
Whalley, J., 132 Wirszubski, Chaim, 952, 953
Wharton, George, 106 Wirth, Oswald, 55, 388, 441, 1111
Wheeler, Rosina Doyle, see: Lytton, Rosina Wisse, E, 1064
Whichcote, Benjamin, 291 Withen, Anne Sorine, 462
Whiston, William, 866 Wittek, Anna, 693
White, Victor, 652 Wolfart, Erasmus, 662
Whitgift, Archbishop, 304 Wolff, Christian, 889-890, 892, 100
Widar, Jarl, see: Wiligut, Karl Maria Wolff, Kurt, 198-199
Widemann, Carl, 460 Wolfram von Eschenbach, 25, 41, 826
Widmanstetter, J.A., 1162 Wollner, Johann Christoph, 872, 1tor6-1017
Wied, Hermann von, 6 Wollstonecraft, Mary, 173
Wieland, Christoph Martin, 787, 891 Wolter, Gabrielle von, 326
Wieland, Hermann, 95 Wolther, Guido, 380
Wier, Johann, 6, 8, 622, 1176-1177 Woltmann, Ludwig, 673
Wieser, Max, 963 Wood, William Burton Persse, 170
Wigston, W.EC., 155 Woodford, A.EA., 545
Wilber, Ken, 574, 846, 1134 Woodman, William Robert, 545-548, 783,
Wilbur, Cornelia, 1036 I169
Wilde, George, 133 Woodroffe, John, see: Avalon, Arthur
Wilde, Oscar, 745, 830 Woodville, Anthony, 534, 538
Wilder, Alexander, 52, 180 Woodward, John, 1098
Wilhelm Friedrich, Marquis, 1166 Wordsworth, William, 614, 1000-1002
Wilhelm, Richard, 323 Worsdale, John, 132
Wilhelm I, Emperor of Germany, 948 Worthington, John, 291
Wilhelm IV von Hessen-Kassel, 320 Wright, Claude Falls, 184, 555
Wiligut, Karl Maria, 96-97 Wright, Frank Lloyd, 450, 453
Wilkins, Charles, 907 Wright, R. Ramsay, 125
Wilkins, John, 200, 1139 Wronski, Jozef Marie Hoéné-, 379, 645, 690,
Wilkinson, Margaret, 204 816, L177-1179
Wilkinson, William, ro80 Wulf, Elizabeth Clare, see: Prophet, Elizabeth
Wille, Bruno, 1087 Clare
Willermoz, Jean-Baptiste, 79, 204, 256-257, Wulff, Wilhelm, 95, 653
264-265, 280, 333-334, 341, 351, 386-387, Wunenburger, J.J., 652
461-462, 602-605, 676, 749, 771, 773, Wyld, George, 181, 553, 1117, 1120
775-781, 851, 910, 932-935, 988, 1017,
1025-1026, 1032, 1058, 1170-1174 Xenocrates, 876
Willermoz, Pierre-Jacques, 1171 Xenophanes, 30
William IX Paleologus, 4
William of Auvergne, 143, 480-482, 499, 503, Yarker, John, 215, 388, 541, 768, 899, 902, 914,
505-510, 522-524, IT74 1089, 1130
William of Auxerre, 481, 511 Natesshrancese Art 5 55)2045) 0311493 4Osay.08
William of Conches, 19, 30-31, 276, 504, 838, 384, 484, 535, 542-543, 555, 571, O11, 748,
842 Si, Bi, CIAL, WAS
William of Moerbeke, 98, 318 Yeats, John Butler, 1179
William of Saliceto, 1061 Yeats, William Butler , 3, 53, 307, 548-550,
William Paleologus, 5 555-556,714, 784-785, 908, 1092,
Williams, Michael Allen, 195, 633, 1068 T179-1181
Williams, Charles, 436, 678, 1111, 1165 Yehudah ha-Levi, 638
Williams, Edward, see: Morganwg, Iolo Ygé, Claude d’, 238
Williams, Michael, 404, 412 Yorke, Gerald, 283
Williams, William, 203 Young, Brigham, 217
Williamson, Robin, 817 Young, Edward, 174-175, 874
Willis, Robert, 1159
Willis, Thomas, 43, 45 Zadkiel, 133, 204
Wilmans, Helen, 863 Zadkiel II, 133
Wilmshurst, W.L., 52 ait @) © MCA ST
Wilser, Ludwig, 91 Zalewski, Pat, 647
Wilson, Colin, 888 Zambelit. Pala, 74k De 246 4395.7 325 730!
Wilson, John, 132, 571 al-Zanati, Abu ‘Abd Allah, 318
Wilson, W. Daniel, 595 Zane, Lorenzo, 680
Wilson, Woodrow, 1090 Zarathustra, see: Zoroaster
Wimpfeling, Jacob, 1135 Zenno, Giambattista, 129

--- Page 652 ---
1228 INDEX OF PERSONS
Zeno of Citium, 607 704-708, 713, 719, 722, 725, 738-739, 761,
Zesen, Philipp von, 670 763, 841-842, 886, 937, 960-962, 975, 977,
Zetzner, Lazarus, 47, 147, 696 1016, 1065, 1127-1129, I131I-1132,
Zhelihovsky, Vera Petrovna de, see: Jelihowsky, 1182-1183, 1184
Vera Petrovna de Zorzi, Alberto Marino, 395
Ziegler, Leopold, 153, 266, 457, 1181-1182 Zorzi, Dardi, 395
Zimmermann, Robert, 82, 1084 Zorzi, Francesco, see: Giorgio, Francesco
Zimmermann, Rolf Christian, 593, 921, 1015, Zosimus of Panopolis, 16, 21-23, 25, 26, 28, 30,
1074 221, 478, 529, 652, 1183-1186
Zinzendorf, Nikolaus Ludwig, 95, 105, 461, Zostrianos, 834, 836-837, 1065
603, 675, 870, 890-892,956 Zschaetzsch, Karl Georg, 95
Zizka, Jan, 789 Zuccari, Federico, 611
Zola, Emile, 579 Zuichem, Viglio, 229
Zollner, Johann Karl Friedrich, ro81 Zwackh, Franz Xaver, 590, 594-595
Zoroaster, 84, 86, 112, 116, 126, 362-364, 366, Zwinger, Theodore, 918
398-399, 427, 457, 483, 532, 593, 649, 687, Zwingli, Ulrich, 460, 921

--- Page 653 ---
:
pa) = ara
ca + a : e
—— a
ae a =< ; =. : e
ae : : ;
ro 7 A ~ : = a Se es oe _ - |
<=— — - = > <a eea ged=" aa Oe ne: a - |
Dn a She o eae + = : -— oe i
Ja ie 7 a ek eS mir’ v | : Je ie ae an i
ee7 — 2 Sea i oe ae
“ f= — ; a : : . : oP ir e :
ye = : ' = 7 ; te =~
- ' =f = i

--- Page 654 ---
9 By
¥ : =
gon)
;
an
BA
7 7 \“
I - |
a ; a
- eee: a
_ =a - .
_ a. s Ay
v — ;
ae
- fi ¢
<— a
eae
ih = > ; t
. oa : ;
; A _ oe _ on : :
we = - ey - a a
7):j7’7
a
an

--- Page 655 ---
bata

--- Page 656 ---
‘The Dictionary of Gnosis and Western
Esotericism is a brilliantly conceived and skillfully
executed reference tool unlike anything the
scholarly world has ever seen. In two massive
volumes it covers every aspect of pagan, Jewish,
and Christian religious discourses and phenomena
traditionally labeled gnosticism, hermeticism,
astrology, magic, the “occult sciences," esoteric
religion, and much more. The detailed and
insightful articles, on nearly every related topic
imaginable, are produced by an impressive array
of renowned scholars, and usefully include
up-to date bibliographies. Six years in the
making, this is a work that every student of
religion, ancient and modern, will certainly
want to own.’
Bart.D. Ehrman, James A. Gray Distinguished
Professor and Chair of Religious Studies,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
VOLUME II SET
ISBN 90 04 143726 ISBN 90 04 141871
9°789004"1437 22 9"789004 \|
Cover design: Coérdesign,Leiden
WWW.BRILL.NL
